==========================================================================================================================================
Individual placement and support: cross-sectional study of equality of access and outcome for Black, Asian and minority ethnic communities
==========================================================================================================================================

:Author: Rachel Perkins
:Author: Rash Patel
:Author: Amelia Willett
:Author: Laura Chisholm
:Author: Miles RinaldiCorrespondence to Rachel Perkins
         (rachel@rachelperkins.london)
:Date: 2022-02
:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   To explore whether people from Black, Asian and minority ethnic
   (BAME) communities experience equality of access and outcome in
   individual placement and support (IPS) employment services.
   Cross-sectional data were analysed of all people with severe mental
   health problems who accessed two mature high-fidelity IPS services in
   London in 2019 (*n* = 779 people).

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   There were no significant differences between the proportions of
   people who gained employment. The data strongly suggest that people
   from BAME communities are not differentially disadvantaged in
   relation to either access to or outcomes of IPS employment services.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   The challenge for mental health professionals is not to decide who
   can and who cannot work but, how to support people on their
   case-loads to access IPS and move forward with life beyond their
   illness.


pmc
It is recognised that people from Black, Asian and minority ethnic
(BAME) communities both perceive\ :sup:`1` and experience inequality in
access,\ :sup:`2` experience and outcomes\ :sup:`3` within mental health
services in England. The NHS Long Term Plan makes a renewed commitment
to improve and widen access for adults needing mental health support
partly through a new community-based offer. This includes access to
employment support for people with severe mental health problems through
the expansion of the evidence-based individual placement and support
(IPS) approach.\ :sup:`4`

IPS involves a direct, individualised search for competitive employment
that avoids lengthy pre-employment preparation or training and does not
screen people for work ‘readiness’. It does not exclude people on the
basis of diagnosis, symptoms or substance misuse. IPS is a ‘place and
train’ approach, rather than a traditional ‘train and place’ approach,
to vocational rehabilitation. There are now 27 randomised controlled
trials supporting the efficacy of IPS compared with traditional
vocational rehabilitation.\ :sup:`5` National Institute for Health and
Care Excellence (NICE) guidance recommends IPS for people with severe
mental health problems who wish to gain and retain
employment.\ :sup:`6,7`

Within this context, consideration needs to be given to ensuring that
people from BAME communities have fair access to employment support and
equal opportunities to gain employment. There has been considerable
concern that there is no parity between BAME communities and the White
majority in access, experience and outcomes of mental
healthcare\ :sup:`8` and so it is right that we ask questions about the
effectiveness of IPS for BAME groups.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

This was a service evaluation of two IPS services in London. Formal
ethical approval was therefore not required.

.. _sec1-1:

The IPS services
----------------

To explore whether people from BAME communities experience equality of
access and outcome in IPS, two IPS services together serving five London
boroughs were selected: Central and North West London NHS Foundation
Trust (CNWL) IPS service, serving people using secondary adult community
mental health services in the boroughs of Westminster, Kensington &
Chelsea, Harrow and Hillingdon (CNWL also provides IPS services in
Milton Keynes but data from this service were not included in the
current study because this was a relatively new service and our focus
was on mature London services);Working Well Trust (WWT) IPS service,
which works in partnership with East London NHS Foundation Trust (ELFT)
serving people using secondary adult community mental health services in
the borough of Tower Hamlets.

These services were selected because they are both mature, high-fidelity
IPS services recognised as centres of excellence by the Centre for
Mental Health.\ :sup:`9` Both serve areas of London where there are
large BAME communities and they represent the two main models of
providing IPS in English secondary mental healthcare services. The CNWL
IPS service is provided by the trust and all employment specialists are
trust employees and members of multidisciplinary adult community mental
health teams. The WWT IPS service is a voluntary sector organisation
whose employment specialists are employed by the WWT but integrated into
ELFT Tower Hamlets adult community mental health teams.

.. _sec1-2:

Data
----

The two IPS services provided anonymised cross-sectional data on all
people with severe mental health problems who accessed their service
between 1 January and 31 December 2019. For each person, the following
anonymised data were supplied: ethnicity (White, Asian/Asian British,
Black/Black British, Mixed, Other)agegenderdate of accessing the IPS
servicejob outcome (whether the person gained at least one day of open
paid employment by 31 December 2019). More detailed data on duration of
employment were not available but anecdotal evidence suggests that in
practice the majority were employed for a longer period.

Data were also provided by the respective mental health trusts on the
ethnicity and gender breakdown of everyone served by their adult
community mental health teams for the same time period.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

`Table 1 <#tab01>`__ shows that *n* = 779 people accessed the two IPS
services between 1 January 2019 and 31 December 2019: *n* = 412 accessed
the CNWL IPS service and *n* = 367 accessed the WWT IPS service.
Ethnicity data were available for *n* = 714 (92%) of these people. Table
1Number of people accessing the individual placement and support (IPS)
services between 1 January and 31 December 2019, by ethnicity, gender
and ageCNWL IPS serviceWWT IPS serviceTotalPeople accessing IPS 1 Jan to
31 Dec 2019, *n*\ 412367779Ethnicity, *n* (%)White134 (36.7)114
(41.3)278 (38.9)Asian/Asian British77 (21.1)114 (32.7)191
(26.8)Black/Black British64 (17.5)63 (18.1)127 (17.8)Mixed38 (10.4)21
(6.0)59 (8.3)Other52 (14.2)7 (2.0)59 (8.3)Missing (not known/prefer not
to say), *n*\ 471865Gender, *n* (%)Male207 (50.2)180 (49.2)387
(49.7)Female205 (49.8)186 (50.8)391 (50.3)Missing (not known/prefer not
to say), *n*\ 011Age, years: mean (s.d.), range37.73 (12.02), 17–6534.39
(10.74), 18–6936.16 (11.55), 17–69 [1]_

.. _sec2-1:

Equality of access
------------------

To explore equality of access to IPS services for those from BAME
communities, for each service the number of people of different ethnic
communities accessing the service was compared with the ethnic breakdown
of those using secondary adult community mental health services in the
boroughs served, using a *χ*\ :sup:`2`-test statistic for goodness of
fit. The ethnic breakdown of those using secondary adult community
mental health services was selected rather than general population data
for the boroughs served because it is people using secondary adult
community mental health services who constitute the population eligible
to access the IPS service. The results of these analyses can be seen in
`Table 2 <#tab02>`__. Table 2Proportion of people from different BAME
communities accessing individual placement and support (IPS) services in
2019 in comparison with their proportions in the population using adult
community mental health servicesPeople accessing IPS service, *n*
(%)People using adult community mental health services, *n* (%)People
from BAME communities accessing IPS services, %CNWL IPS serviceWhite134
(36.7)2774 (39.6)4.8\ *χ*\ :sup:`2` = 22.05, *P* < 0.01Asian/Asian
British77 (21.1)1158 (16.5)6.6Black/Black British64 (17.5)810
(11.5)7.9Mixed38 (10.4)936 (13.3)4.1Other52 (14.2)1335 (19.0)3.9Not
known/stated47 (11.4)1350 (16.1)3.5WWT IPS serviceWhite144 (41.3)900
(41.1)1.6\ *χ*\ :sup:`2` = 34.22, *P* < 0.01Asian/Asian British114
(32.7)805 (36.7)14.2Black/Black British63 (18.0)259 (11.8)24.3Mixed21
(6.0)61 (2.3)34.4Other7 (2.0)167 (7.6)4.2Not known/stated18 (4.9)90
(3.9)20.0 [2]_

`Table 2 <#tab02>`__ shows that there were significant differences in
the proportions of people of different ethnicities accessing the IPS
service compared with the respective secondary adult mental health
service populations (CNWL IPS service: *χ*\ :sup:`2` = 22.05,
*P* < 0.01; WW IPS Service *χ*\ :sup:`2` = 34.22, *P* < 0.01).

In both services, the proportions of White and Asian/Asian British
clients accessing IPS were similar to those in the population of people
using secondary adult community mental health community services.
However, in both services, the proportion of Black/Black British clients
accessing IPS was 52% greater than in the population using secondary
adult community mental health services: respectively 17.5% compared with
11.5% in the CNWL IPS service and 18.0% compared with 11.8% in the WWT
service.

The proportions of men and women accessing the IPS service did not
differ significantly from the proportions using adult community mental
health services (CNWL: *χ*\ :sup:`2` = 2.61, *P* = 0.11; Working Well
Trust: *χ*\ :sup:`2` = 0.14, *P* = 0.71).

.. _sec2-2:

Equality of outcome
-------------------

| To explore equality of employment outcome of IPS services for those
  from BAME communities, job outcomes for people of different
  ethnicities were compared using *χ*\ :sup:`2`-test statistics. Two
  separate analyses were performed. The first considered everyone
  accessing the IPS services between 1 January and 31 December 2019 and
  whether or not they had gained employment by 31 December 2019.
  However, some of these people – those accessing the service later in
  the year – would only have had the opportunity for a very short period
  of support before 31 December 2019. Therefore, a separate analysis was
  conducted considering only those who had accessed the service in the
  first half of the year (between 1 January and 30 June 2019) and had
  therefore had the opportunity of at least 6 months’ support. The
  results of these analyses can be seen in `Table 3 <#tab03>`__. Table
  3Job outcomes by 31 December 2019 by ethnic group People who gained
  employment by 31 Dec 2019, *n* (%) CNWL IPS serviceWWT IPS
  serviceTotalAll who accessed IPS 1 Jan to 31 Dec 2019141 (38.6)
| (412 people, ethnicity data available for 365)107 (30.7)
| (367 people, ethnicity data available for 349)248 (34.7)
| (779 people, ethnicity data available for 714)Ethnicity White47
  (35.1)46 (31.9)93 (33.5) Asian/Asian British35 (45.5)37 (32.5)72
  (37.7) Black/Black British23 (35.9) 18 (28.6)41 (32.3) Mixed15 (39.5)5
  (23.8)20 (33.9) Other21 (40.4)1 (14.3)22 (37.3)\ *χ*\ :sup:`2` = 2.50,
  *P* = 0.64\ *χ*\ :sup:`2` = 1.76, *P* = 0.78\ *χ*\ :sup:`2` = 1.46,
  *P* = 0.84People who had opportunity for at least 6 months’ support by
  31 Dec 2019\ `a <#tfn3_2>`__\ 55 (43.3)
| (139 people, ethnicity data available for 127)54 (42.2)
| (135 people, ethnicity data available for 128)109 (42.7)
| (274 people, ethnicity data available for 255)Ethnicity White18
  (39.1)29 (46.0)47 (43.1) Asian/Asian British8 (40.0)13 (39.4)21
  (39.6) Black/Black British6 (30.0)10 (45.5)16 (38.1) Mixed10 (66.7)2
  (22.2)12 (50.0) Other13 (50.0)0 (0)13 (48.1)\ *χ*\ :sup:`2` = 5.66,
  *P* = 0.22\ *χ*\ :sup:`2` = 2.78, *P* = 0.59\ *χ*\ :sup:`2` = 1.43,
  *P* = 0.84 [3]_ [4]_

`Table 3 <#tab03>`__ shows that, when considering everyone accessing the
service between 1 January and 31 December 2019, 34.7% had gained
employment by 31 December 2019: 38.6% in the CNWL IPS service and 30.7%%
in the WW IPS Service. Considering only those who had the opportunity of
at least 6 months’ IPS support (those who had accessed the service
between 1 January and 30 June 2019), by 31 December, 42.7% had gained
employment: 43.3% in the CNWL IPS service and 42.2% in the WW IPS
service.

There was no significant difference in the employment outcomes by 31
December 2019 for people from different ethnic backgrounds (for everyone
accessing IPS between 1 January and 31 December 2019:
*χ*\ :sup:`2` = 1.46, *P* = 0.84; for those who had the opportunity for
at least 6 months’ input: *χ*\ :sup:`2` = 1.43, *P* = 0.84). Neither was
there any significant difference between the outcomes for people of
different ethnicities in either of the services when considered
separately.

This equality of employment outcome was found when men and women from
different ethnic backgrounds were considered separately. For those
accessing IPS between 1 January and 31 December 2019 there was no
significant difference in job outcomes between those from different
ethnic groups for men (*χ*\ :sup:`2` = 7.62, *P* = 0.11) or for women
(*χ*\ :sup:`2` = 2.84, *P* = 0.59). Similarly, equality of employment
outcome was found for people from different ethnic backgrounds in
different age groups (up to 25 years of age: *χ*\ :sup:`2` = 1.62,
*P* = 0.81; 26–40 years: *χ*\ :sup:`2` = 4.38, *P* = 0.38; 41–55 years:
*χ*\ :sup:`2` = 0.50, *P* = 0.97; over 55 years: *χ*\ :sup:`2` = 2.93,
*P* = 0.60).

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

The data collected from these two mature high-fidelity London IPS
services strongly suggest that IPS is equally effective in securing
employment for people of different ethnic backgrounds using secondary
mental health services. For men and women, young and old there were no
significant differences between the proportions who gained employment by
the end of the year in which they accessed IPS services. It is not known
whether similar results would be obtained in less well-established
services – it takes time to implement an effective IPS service. With the
NHS England national roll-out of IPS it is essential that routine
service monitoring includes access and outcome data broken down by
ethnicity to demonstrate the key IPS principle of ‘zero exclusion’ that
ensures services are equally effective across different communities.

Although the proportions of men and women accessing these IPS services
did not differ, there were significant differences in the proportions of
people of different ethnicities accessing them. These differences do not
suggest differential disadvantage for people from BAME communities.
Quite the reverse, the proportions of Black/Black British people
accessing each IPS services were higher than their proportions in the
populations of people using secondary adult community mental health
services in the areas (CNWL: 17.5 *v.* 11.5%; WWT: 18.0 *v.* 11.8%).
However, there are marked differences between the two services: in CNWL
the proportion of people from different ethnic communities accessing IPS
did not differ markedly, but at WWT there were substantial differences.
The reasons for this cannot be ascertained from the data. For example,
it may reflect a positive bias in referrals to IPS or a greater interest
in work opportunities by the different ethnic communities (perhaps
itself reflecting greater deprivation/different employment rates). The
data considered here are for those who engaged with the services: it is
not known how many were referred but did not engage with the service
offered. It should also be noted that the ‘not known/stated’ ethnicity
category was higher in CNWL than in WWT/Tower Hamlets adult mental
health services.

It has sometimes been suggested that South Asian communities may be
protective of people with psychosis and consider employment as a risk.
Our study would suggest that this is not the case. It showed no
differences in access or outcome for Asian/Asian British people.
Similarly, previous research has demonstrated that Asian/Asian British
people using IPS services were more likely to be in employment than
their White counterparts.\ :sup:`10` However, in our study it should
also be noted that, although in CNWL the proportion of Asian/Asian
British people was substantially higher among those accessing IPS
services than among the adult community mental health services
population (21.1 *v.* 16.5%), in WWT it was lower (32.7 *v.* 36.7%). It
is possible that this difference results from different composition of
the Asian/Asian British population (WWT: 80.5% Bangladeshi, 4.9% Indian,
4.1% Pakistani; CNWL: 4.8% Bangladeshi, 41.7% Indian, 13.6% Pakistani).
Clearly this area requires greater understanding and a more detailed
breakdown of ethnicity than was possible here.

Literature relating to BAME communities and mental health services is
replete with examples of disparities in access, experience and outcome
of services and, in particular, high levels of compulsion.\ :sup:`11` In
England, people with mental health problems from BAME communities have
been less likely to use employment support services and as a consequence
have been less likely to succeed in gaining employment than their White
British peers.\ :sup:`12,13` Morgan et al\ :sup:`14` have suggested that
addressing the social needs of BAME patients is likely to lead to
improved clinical outcomes and engagement with services. Perhaps
increasing the availability of IPS is one good way of doing this?

.. _sec3-1:

How IPS works
-------------

IPS services are entirely voluntary. In line with the fidelity standards
for IPS,\ :sup:`15` an employment specialist is integrated into a
clinical team. People using secondary mental health services can access
IPS services if they themselves want to work – there is no selection on
the basis of diagnosis or supposed ‘readiness’ for work. IPS is
personalised and based on the individual's preferences and choices –
very different from typical mainstream employment support programmes.
Through shared decision-making, IPS rebalances power and encourages a
collaborative dialogue between the employment specialist and the
individual. Shared decision-making relies on two sources of expertise:
the employment specialist as an expert on supporting individuals with
mental health problems to gain and retain employment, and the individual
as an expert on themselves, their social circumstances, attitudes to
work, and health, values and preferences. Both must be willing to share
information and accept responsibility for joint decision-making. The
employment specialist needs to provide information about the most
effective ways to gain and retain employment. The individual needs to
tell the employment specialist about their preferences. As IPS is
integrated into the clinical team, the challenge for mental health
professionals is not to decide who can and who cannot work but how to
support people on their case-loads to access IPS and move forward with
life beyond their illness.\ :sup:`16` Two interesting findings arise
from this study: a disproportionate number of Black/Black British people
were attracted to the IPS services – gaining employment was of
importance to them – and there were no significant differences in
outcomes for people from different ethnic backgrounds.

.. _sec3-2:

Limitations and implications
----------------------------

Clearly, further research is necessary. The naturalistic design of this
study is a limitation yet provides a real-world understanding of access
to and outcomes from IPS services achieved for BAME communities using
secondary mental health services. The data collected here considered
only outcomes at the end of the year studied. It is possible that others
would have gone on to gain employment had longer-term follow-up been
possible. Data on type of employment and job tenure were not collected,
neither could people's experience of using the services be ascertained,
and a more detailed breakdown of ethnicity than was possible here would
clearly be desirable. However, it is interesting to note that, of the
three randomised controlled trials of IPS in England, none has reported
outcomes by ethnicity,\ :sup:`17–19` whereas some of the naturalistic
studies have.\ :sup:`20,21` Although there is a clear need for better
quantitative data, the collection of qualitative data relating to
people's experience of using IPS services is necessary to understand
some of the differences found and ensure equality of access and outcome
for all.

Everyone has the right to be treated with dignity and respect, without
discrimination, and to be able to access appropriate mental healthcare
when it is needed. Identifying and reducing health inequalities in
access, experience and outcomes is essential to the delivery of
high-quality mental healthcare. Mental health services have a duty to
use data and existing resources to identify inequalities. The present
study strongly suggests that people from BAME communities are not
differentially disadvantaged in relation to either access to or outcomes
of IPS employment support services.

**Rachel Perkins** is a clinical psychologist and senior consultant at
Implementing Recovery through Organisational Change (ImROC), based in
London, UK. **Rash Patel** is Head of Employment and Volunteering at
Central and North West London NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK. **Amelia
Willett** is Operations Director at the Working Well Trust, London, UK.
**Laura Chisholm** is Employment Services Manager at the Working Well
Trust, London, UK. **Miles Rinaldi** is Head of Strategic Development at
South West London and St George's Mental Health NHS Trust, London, UK.

.. _sec-das:

Data availability
=================

Data are available from the corresponding author.

R.Pe. is the lead author. R.Pe. and M.R. designed the study, completed
the statistical analysis and wrote the first draft of the paper. R.Pa.,
A.W. and L.C. collected the data, provided interpretation and commented
on drafts of the manuscript. All authors were involved in production of
the final version of the paper and meet ICMJE criteria for authorship.

This work was conducted as part of the work of IPS Grow, a partnership
programme led by Social Finance and funded by NHS England to support the
expansion of IPS services across England in response to the NHS Long
Term Plan.

.. _nts5:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. [1]
   CNWL, Central and North West London NHS Foundation Trust; WWT,
   Working Well Trust.

.. [2]
   BAME, Black, Asian and minority ethnic; CNWL, Central and North West
   London NHS Foundation Trust; WWT, Working Well Trust.

.. [3]
   CNWL, Central and North West London NHS Foundation Trust; IPS,
   individual placement and support; WWT, Working Well Trust.

.. [4]
   i.e. accessed IPS between 1 January and 30 June 2019.
