==========================
Interview with Dr Jan Wise
==========================

:Author: Abdi Sanati
:Date: 2022-02

pmc
Dr Wise is a consultant in general adult psychiatry working in inner
city London. I first met Dr Jan Wise around 15 years ago through another
colleague. At that time, Dr Wise was already active in the British
Medical Association (BMA). I found his knowledge of medicolegal and
contractual issues vast and unparalleled. I have always admired his
wisdom and his structured approach in solving problems. He remains
active in the BMA and is currently the chair of BMA Medicolegal
Committee. What made him stand out for me was his work on physician
burnout, something I faced a few years ago. Dr Wise is also active at
international level. He is elected to the Board of European Psychiatric
Association. In addition to that he is also an Honorary Member of the
World Psychiatric Association and Distinguished International Fellow of
the American Psychiatric Association. I caught up with him to discuss
issues such as pressure on psychiatrists and his international work.

**Thank you very much for agreeing to this interview Dr Wise. You
mentioned in your article that going an extra mile endangers staff and
patients. Could you elaborate on that statement please?**

We are a finite resource. We are human. We are limited and we are
fallible. So, even under normal circumstances, there's a limit to how
long we can stay on the board, clerking a patient, how long we can sit
in casualty comforting the truly distressed psychotic patient who is
ripping their hands to shreds, trying to escape the manacles the police
have put them in. And this is a never-ending tide. There is always a
need to care, there is no end to the misery that is out there, that we
want to address. And if we do not place limits on ourselves, we will
wear ourselves out. Even before COVID-19, we wore out faster than we
were replaced. If I'm going to say that more succinctly, ‘We will never
run out of patients, we will run out of you’. So staff have got to look
after themselves, to avoid burnout, the moral distress that we're seeing
at the moment. We hear from the BMA and in surveys that there are
unprecedented numbers of doctors in general – not just psychiatrists –
who want to leave, who want to reduce their hours, who don't want to do
this.

**Thank you, another thing that comes up is the danger of being at risk
of clinical negligence charges.**

Yes. People go into medicine because they want to help others, and that
urge to help often clouds our judgement. Things are much better now than
they were 25 years ago when some of us started. With exception reporting
and reduced hours, we are less often in the scenario of people being so
tired that they fall asleep at the nursing station. But what we forget
is that the General Medical Council is going to hold you to the
standards of the reasonable doctor with your experience. So if you're
underperforming because you're excessively tired, whether that's from a
long shift, having young children, or sick relatives that you are caring
for, if you make a mistake, being tired is unlikely to be a defence. So,
when people stay beyond their shift, or they have covered a night
because the trainee was sick and there was no one to come in, we need to
protect ourselves by letting the system know we are not fit to deliver
care, because making an error by staying behind really puts your
registration at risk, let alone the very unpleasant process of a
relative or a patient deciding to sue you, because you made a mistake.

**Thank you. Reading your work on this topic is very interesting. It
seems that going the extra mile has been celebrated as something of
value, you're expected to say it in interviews that you are willing to
go the extra mile. It is expected from us now.**

And that's the problem. If someone said they would never go the extra
mile that would be a disaster for the profession and for the person. The
Royal Army Medical Corps has as its motto *In Arduis Fidelis*, faithful
in adversity. And in unusual circumstances, I would hope we would pull
together for something like the Clapham rail disaster, Grenfell Tower or
Piper Alpha, and we would all be there. But when it is not unusual, when
it's not even every month, but it's every week, then it's wholly
inappropriate to go even the extra 10 metres, because it just allows the
government to underfund the service. And eventually people won't be able
to go the extra distance and all patients will suffer, because we didn't
say enough is enough.

**You have written about it in the context of the whole of profession of
medicine. How do you specifically see it in psychiatry?**

Well the good news is, we have excellent training in boundaries, so it's
relatively easy working in a profession where people aren't going to die
if you don't do it, to have less porous boundaries than someone working
in emergency medicine or oncology. I think the trainees are beginning to
see from some consultants how to have an appropriate work–life balance.
If they go the extra distance on Monday, they go short on Tuesday,
Wednesday or Thursday, but on one day that week, they leave early to
make up for the extra delivery. I think that is becoming easier. But
what I hear, from colleagues and from other services like child and
adolescent mental health services, are phrases like we need to get
better at saying we are not commissioned to do that. Doing something
that we are not commissioned to do, is to deliver it for free. Which
means we are not delivering what we were commissioned to do unless we
are delivering more hours than we should be. In a very concrete way,
restricting yourself to what is commissioned in the time that is
commissioned, and making it clear why you are doing that, helps managers
argue for the funds they need. It is very simple for management to say
it takes 12 man hours a day to deliver that and you have only
commissioned 8 man hours, and many consultants are making it clear that
they have used to give you 12 but they do not feel appreciated, so they
are now only doing what you pay for.

**One thing I liked about your writing is emphasis on contracts, because
we are contracted to deliver something, but many of us go beyond our
contracts and feel it is a moral duty to do so.**

There are many different types of expectations. Everyone has an internal
model of what they would like to be, different from what they are. One
of the goals of therapy is to get people to marry those models because
it leads to more happiness. The reason I mention that is, I would really
hope that just as we say to an adolescent that peer pressure is not a
good reason to give up your virtue prematurely or to take drugs, I don't
see why peer pressure is a good reason to overdeliver, to stay late or
start early. Now, as you've mentioned, there are other pressures, we
have expectations on ourselves. If you're a perfectionist and everything
has to be just so, it is a real struggle to make it perfect with the
resources we have now. It was a real struggle 10 years ago, and we do
not have now what we had 10 years ago.

**I was thinking that if the service is well-functioning, does it need
people to work beyond their contract?**

It very much depends upon how one defines well-functioning. Deming, an
economist, said that every system is perfectly designed to get that to
give the results it gets. If the staff are working to their contracts
then they are not overdelivering. If that delivers what was commissioned
then that is ‘well-functioning’ – but it may not be a ‘good service’.
But I am not sure we will ever have an average service that achieves
that because, on average, consultants across the UK are working 4–6
hours a week beyond what they're contracted to do.

**Another issue is physician burnout, as you mentioned doctors are
burning out. And one thing that I fear is that in the post-pandemic
National Health Service (NHS), we will have even more and more burnout.
I do not think giving more money would fix it.**

In the short term, the pandemic has been absolutely horrendous. It's
been horrendous for its acute devastation, but also because it has
eroded rest and recreation. People cannot travel, and rest and
recreation is more than just not being at work. It is seeing our loved
ones, seeing friends and family, going and doing those interesting
things that feed the soul and spirit. There are also positives from the
pandemic. We have learned that we don't need endless meetings, or to be
in the same room for procedural issues. It kills creativity.

You can't do research development across Zoom. Unless you already have a
really strong relationship with your peers, it's very difficult for
those ideas to zing around the room to snowball and become something
truly exhilarating and exciting. So we do need in-person meetings, but
we are no longer losing hours to get to a room that we feel obliged to
sit in to listen to something for 45 min when we really need to only
hear 10 min. That actually is great for democracy like medical staff
committees or local negotiating committees, because it means that you
can do them more often. So the time before a response has been given is
dramatically cut. You can have your consultant body complaining about
the on-call rota or raising issues about trainees safety or highlighting
that there's a personality conflict with a clinical director much faster
than ever before. So I agree that it is exhausting, that everybody is
tired, but it has given some real opportunities for change, including
the realisation that there's got to be more to life than work.

**That is very true. Staying on the issue of burnout, I remember that in
a conference some leading scholars put the responsibility of burnout on
the individual. If the individual walks away they wouldn't burn out.
What about the role of the system?**

I think you are referring to the sense that resilience in a way, blames
the person for not being able to cope. And it is very difficult to build
resilience in a disaster. The NHS does not have enough resources, if
there were more staff, more time, less demand, we wouldn't be burning
out like this. If you think about burnout as the consequence of friction
between personal aspiration and what can be delivered, we know that the
NHS is like a supertanker, it takes years to change its directions. It
takes over a decade to train a new consultant. So, if we want to keep on
doing things the way we're doing them, people are going to burn out, we
will fail. We should be creative, for instance using nurse prescribers,
or physician assistants, changing our view about handling risk. There
are tasks that can be dropped or allocated to rapidly trainable members
of staff that would change their day-to-day jobs. None of us do the
mundane activities we did 20 years ago, or even 10 years ago. They've
been devolved to other staff. I'm concerned that when we take back some
of those administrative duties such as booking or changing appointments,
even with an app, it is inefficient. So it's helping people to think
about why does it feel useless, what is the frustration and how does one
fit within that? That, I think, is the key to maintaining longevity in
the service, which is critical in a way it wasn't previously; people are
now going to be in psychiatry till 67 years of age, probably 69 for
those who are starting now, because the state pension age will go up,
rather than leaving at 55 with mental health officer status.

**Do you think the mental health officer status should be reinstated?**

Yes, from a pragmatic perspective. However, if they do not change the
pension rules, then when people hit 50 years old or thereabouts, they
will need to go part time, which is a good thing. We have a paucity of
child and adolescent services in north-west London. There are charities
interested in growing the independent sector provision, and they were
very, very concerned that this would harm the NHS. A couple of us spoke
with them, pointed out the waiting lists and the barriers to providing
more. And it helped them understand that were they to point out to
relatively new consultants that they can work in the independent sector
for part of the time, in a multidisciplinary team, they will actually
grow capacity to treat an underserved proportion of the population.
There are also those who've retired with mental health officer status
who are available, and there will be those who need to reduce their
provision to the NHS because of breaches of the annual allowance, who
are also available. So independent provision is not necessarily at the
detriment of NHS provision, it can be positive for patients and positive
for staff.

**It's interesting because NHS and the private sector are presented as
the polar opposites, and private is seen as kind of the dark side. I
think a healthy private service could help the NHS.**

Absolutely. If people have a reasonable alternate source of income
they're not beholden to a single master, they're able to point out
inappropriate working conditions, lack of respect or the shameful
physical environment. Why should patients and staff have to put up with
substandard facilities? There is no reason why we shouldn't support
independent provision, which is not in direct conflict with the NHS,
e.g. the independent sector can't really provide adequately for
psychosis. Although I do hear a growing view that the NHS can't provide
adequate care in metropolitan areas.

**One think I have witnessed is the constant reorganisation of the
services, and what do you think is the effect is on psychiatrists?**

Well one of the effects is understanding it's a life cycle event. The
first time it happens, you're full of enthusiasm, it's going to solve
these problems. The second time, well, maybe they just didn't do it
right the first time. The fifth time, your main concern becomes, how am
I going to get a solo office. Will I still have a secretary? One's
enthusiasm for the delivery of clinical care can erode with time, I
exaggerate for dramatic purposes. In the last reorganisation we had, I
delivered a piece of work pointing out that the manpower calculations
for the metrics that were planned meant that staff would have no breaks
in a week. This was nursing staff, so that was inappropriate. The
revised metrics still meant that they only got half an hour's break in
the week! So, consultants still have an important role in
reorganisation. But we need to bear in mind that the primary purpose is
often not what we're told this is for. It is politically driven, it
hides budget or manpower cuts. Consultation must be meaningful; to
paraphrase, no change to me, without me!

**And how do you see the increase in bureaucracy in psychiatry? That is
one of my pet hates, I have to admit.**

It goes hand in hand with an increasing conviction that if you measure
everything, you can prevent the things you want to prevent. One of the
biggest drawbacks I found of electronic records is the loss of the
narrative. I am fully aware that this may be harking back to an
inglorious past that was never present. But when I look at case files
for medicolegal reports, I see the old discharge summaries, and
someone's life is explained in glorious detail. It's very difficult to
piece that together nowadays from an electronic patient record. There
are advantages, one can cut and paste the highlights quite easily. But
it then appears to be that all one is reading is cut and paste, for the
large part.

**One thing that I always ask about is clustering, and the way patients
are reduced to clusters.**

Yes. Some people have gone as far as identifying clusters with
diagnosis. And how is that going to help them when we start using
ICD-11!

**It's interesting you mentioned narrative. One thing, as psychiatrists,
we used to be trained in, was psychopathology, which emphasises
narrative. And it's kind of being pushed out of the curriculum. And that
is, I think, to the detriment of psychiatry. What do you think?**

It is sometimes surprising the lack of scepticism that I see in
trainees. Why is this patient presenting in this way at this time? It's
relatively easy to say why in this way, but there's not enough attention
to why at this time. We underrecognise the degree of secondary gain that
can be present. Whether it's problems with neighbours, benefits or
family. Often, that is the secret to understanding why there's a
deterioration now.

**You are very involved with European psychiatry. Reading some articles
from mainland Europe, I think there is a gap between UK and European
psychiatry, and we need to actually get more together.**

Definitely. One of the things that's very odd about looking at other
systems is, it's really easy to idolise them or denigrate them. So for
years, I was going to the American Psychiatric Association for clinical
excellence and the European Psychiatric Association for connections,
networking and friendship. As time went on I realised that the USA does
have truly outstanding Centres of Excellence. But the average UK
psychiatrist, in my view, was better than the average USA psychiatrist.
Looking at Europe, what came across was the importance of cultural
differences and local circumstances. You do need unique solutions for
different places. In Iceland in the middle of winter, when you can
barely travel to the next building because of the snow and the wind and
the ice, meant they were world leaders in telepsychiatry 30 years ago.
And then you compare that with Denmark, who had a huge influx of
refugees during the Yugoslav War, but a tremendous shortage of
translators, they started using telepsychiatry for interpreters for
psychological treatments for post-traumatic stress disorder. There are
different approaches to hospitalisations, so Italy has a very low rate
of compulsory hospital admissions compared with the UK. It's being
exposed to these that leads you to see important clinical differences
that arise from legal and political differences. It also highlights what
can go horribly wrong if you don't pay attention to the politics.

**I think politics also manifests itself in defensive practice. The fear
of going to Coroner's Court. It's something that worries me that we will
be more defensive, and it doesn't serve patients well.**

It is an attempt to protect oneself against an unknowable risk. As
Professor Wasserman has stated, one can reduce suicide at a population
level, but not at an individual level. If you very thoroughly treat
every single patient, the same number are probably still going to die,
but for most people, that is so horrible that they can't run with it.
One of the things I've noticed is by accepting that there is a risk that
cannot be eliminated, and once one's done what one can do, and been
clear about therapeutic risk, there are usually fewer adverse outcomes.
Partly because you've put the risk on the table and said we've done what
we can do, that there is a chance it will go horribly wrong, but if we
don't take this risk it will never get better, or by being clear the
risk is not one that psychiatry can solve, or is commissioned to solve.
