pmc
*Psychiatry P.R.N.* is edited by four psychiatrists who are involved in
direct clinical care, and it shows in the way the book is configured to
focus on practical, pragmatic learning. The use of multicoloured
formatting, illustrations, text boxes and bullet points makes for easy
reading and quick assimilation. Its small format also allows for easy
portability in a handbag or backpack, to serve as a quick reference.

Though positioned as an undergraduate textbook for medical students, it
will prove to be equally valuable to trainee psychiatrists, nurses,
social workers and occupational therapists. Multiple choice question
(MCQ) and objective and structured clinical examination (OSCE) skills
are covered, case studies are aplenty and each chapter has salient
points highlighted. At the end of each chapter, there is information
available in the form of films, plays, novels, papers and useful
resources. This second edition builds on the well-regarded first edition
(2009), which was highly recommended in the BMA book awards (2010). The
2020 edition adds a chapter on forensic psychiatry. Chapters have been
updated to incorporate new research and facts. Accessibility seems to
have been a focus, with emphasis on diagrams, pictures and artwork.

The book is divided into two parts. Part 1 offers an overview of
psychiatry, including psychiatric assessment, interview skills and
psychiatry as a career choice. Part 2 focuses on ‘theory’, with an
emphasis on imparting key information on major psychiatric conditions in
a lucid, concise manner. Chapters are well laid out, with a uniform
template that proffers developmental, neurobiological and sociological
perspectives. Cross-cultural aspects of psychiatric illness are included
in all the chapters.

I would have liked to see author credits for each chapter individually,
but that is a minor quibble.

Strunk's *The Elements of Style*, first published a century ago,
emphasised the rules of writing and language composition. *Psychiatry
P.R.N.* reflects advancements in modern publishing, wherein the written
word is intertwined with audio-visual and interactive media to enhance
learning. I would suggest *Psychiatry P.R.N.* as recommended reading for
all psychiatry training grades, as well as consultants who are
interested in teaching and training.
