=========================================================
Review of antipsychotic prescribing at HMP/YOI Low Newton
=========================================================



Lois Carey
Stephen Barlow

:Correspondence: Lois Carey (Lois.Carey@nhs.net)

:date: 2022-02

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and Method
      :name: sec_a1

   The purpose of this review was to establish whether the prescription
   of antipsychotic medication in HMP Low Newton was safe, rational and
   consistent with current best practice. A search of the electronic
   healthcare records was performed on 14 March 2018 to identify all the
   women in the prison who were prescribed antipsychotic medication, and
   then data were collected from the records.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   A total of 46 out of 336 prisoners (13.7%) had been prescribed
   antipsychotic medications; 29 of the 46 patients (84.8%) were also
   prescribed other psychotropic medications at the same time.
   Quetiapine was the most frequently prescribed antipsychotic and was
   also the most likely to be prescribed for off-label indications. Less
   than one-third of all antipsychotic prescriptions were for psychotic
   disorders.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   The rationale for prescribing all antipsychotic medication,
   especially for off-label indications, should be clearly documented
   and reviewed regularly within the prison by the mental health team
   and psychiatrist.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
.. _sec1:

Introduction
============

HMP Low Newton is one of 13 women's prisons in England, and houses
approximately 350 inmates aged 18 years and above. It manages a mixed
population of remand and short-term sentenced prisoners and those
serving longer sentences, including a significant number serving life or
indeterminate sentences. The turnover is high (approximately 70
receptions per week) and psychiatric morbidity is common.

Women in prison are five times more likely to have a mental health
problem than women in the general population, with 78% exhibiting some
kind of psychological disturbance on reception according to the 12-item
General Health Questionnaire.\ :sup:`1` A study of remanded prisoners
found 11% to be acutely psychotic on reception.\ :sup:`2`

At any one time, the mental health team in HMP Low Newton provides
support to about a third of the population, about a quarter of whom have
complex mental health needs.\ :sup:`3` The team conducts triage
assessments for approximately 20 new patients each week. There are three
sessions of clinical input from a psychiatrist, which, given the
constraints on access to prisoners, amounts to approximately 6–8 h
direct clinical contact per week. There are no other prescribers within
the team. Primary care services are provided by an independent
organisation, G4S Healthcare.

Antipsychotics are potent drugs, primarily licensed for the management
of schizophrenia, mania and other severe psychotic disorders. They have
the potential to cause a wide range of acute and long-term side-effects,
some of which can be serious, including parkinsonism, neuroleptic
malignant syndrome, obesity, diabetes, cardiotoxicity, sudden death,
hormonal changes, electrolyte imbalances, convulsions and blood
dyscrasias.

Although they can also be prescribed in both psychiatric and general
practice for the relief of stress, anxiety and psychological distress,
those licensed for this purpose, which include chlorpromazine,
olanzapine and haloperidol, should only be used in the short term. There
is no evidence that antipsychotics have any demonstrable long-term
benefit in the management of personality disorders.\ :sup:`4` Despite
this, off-label prescribing is increasingly common and has been
identified as a cause for concern.\ :sup:`5`

There is a growing body of literature highlighting the misuse potential
of some antipsychotic medications, particularly quetiapine.\ :sup:`6,7`
There is also increasing awareness of the risks of harm from misuse and
diversion of prescribed medicines in prison. These extend beyond the
effects of the drugs themselves to include bullying, threats and
coercion, and debt.\ :sup:`8,9` Deaths from the misuse of prescribed
drugs, including antipsychotics, are rising. The numbers of deaths
caused by antipsychotics in 2017 saw an increase of just over 5% from
2016, which equates to a rate of 2.1 per 1 million
population.\ :sup:`10`

.. _sec2:

Aims/objectives
===============

The purpose of this review was to ascertain whether the prescription of
antipsychotic medication in HMP Low Newton was safe, rational and
consistent with current best practice. We considered best practice
guidance from the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence and
adopted the following principles. Antipsychotic medication should only
be prescribed if there is a clearly documented, evidence-based
rationale, consistent with the drug's licence and/or best practice
guidelines.Patients receiving antipsychotic drugs should be regularly
reviewed by specialist mental health services.No patient should be
prescribed more than one antipsychotic or equivalent doses above
*British National Formulary* (BNF) limits.

.. _sec3:

Method
======

This review was registered with and approved by Tees, Esk and Wear
Valleys (TEWV) NHS Foundation Trust clinical audit department.

All medical records within the prison are held on an electronic system,
and all prescribing is done electronically. A search of the electronic
healthcare records was performed on 14 March 2018 to identify all the
women in the prison who were being prescribed antipsychotic medication
on that day. Their healthcare records were then reviewed by the authors
to identify: patient's agedate of reception into HMP Low
Newtonantipsychotic prescribed and doseprescriber's professional
statusdate of prescriptiondiagnosis or indication for prescription
(where recorded)other psychotropic medicationpast or future contact with
mental health services.

Within TEWV NHS Foundation Trust, ‘off label’ is defined as the use of a
medicine that has a marketing authorisation for an indication
(condition), at a dose, via a route or for a patient category (e.g. age)
that is not listed in the Summary of Product Characteristics for that
medicine. Therefore, any antipsychotic prescription that met this
criterion was defined as ‘off label’.

.. _sec4:

Results
=======

The prison roll for that day was 336. Forty-six women (13.7% of the
total population) were identified as having a current prescription for
antipsychotic medication.

.. _sec4-1:

Age distribution
----------------

The ages of the women taking antipsychotic medication ranged from 22 to
55 years, with a mean and median of 35 years (`Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__ and
`Table 1 <#tab01>`__) This was consistent with the age profile of the
population as a whole within the prison.\ :sup:`3` Fig. 1Age in years of
the women prescribed antipsychotic medication Table 1Age
distributionAge, yearsPatients, *N*\ <21021–301631–401741–5011>502

.. _sec4-2:

Length of time in prison
------------------------

The number of days each patient had been in HMP Low Newton on the date
of the audit ranged from 4 to 2430, with an average of 363 days. The
distribution suggested distinct groups, with the majority having spent
less than 180 days in the prison and a second significant group having
been in for more than a year, reflecting the fact that the prison houses
both a transient population of remand and short-sentenced prisoners and
a more stable population serving longer-term sentences (`Table
2 <#tab02>`__). Table 2Length of time in prison in daysTime in prison,
daysNo. of prisoners<911191–18011181–2704271–3606>36114Range4–2430
daysAverage363 days

.. _sec4-3:

Reception
---------

The majority of patients (26, 56.5%) had been admitted directly from the
community; 19 (41.3%) had come from other prisons and one (2.2%) had
been discharged from a psychiatric hospital.

.. _sec4-4:

Antipsychotics prescribed
-------------------------

The antipsychotics prescribed are shown in `Table 3 <#tab03>`__. By far
the most popular antipsychotics were quetiapine (20 patients) and
olanzapine (16 patients). Other antipsychotics prescribed were
risperidone (three patients), flupenthixol (two patients), aripiprazole
(two patients), sulpride (one patient), chlorpromazine (one patient) and
zuclopenthixol (one patient) (`Table 3 <#tab03>`__). Table
3Antipsychotics prescribedAntipsychoticNo. of patientsQuetiapine (inc.
modified release)20 (43.5%)Olanzapine16 (34.8%)Risperidone3
(6.50%)Sulpride1 (2.20%)Flupenthixol2 (4.30%)Aripiprazole2
(4.30%)Chlorpromazine1 (2.20%)Zuclopenthixol1 (2.20%)

No patients were prescribed doses above BNF limits. One patient was
prescribed two antipsychotics, zuclopenthixol and aripiprazole, after it
was recommended that aripiprazole be started for hyperprolactinaemia
secondary to zuclopenthixol.

.. _sec4-5:

Prescriber
----------

Thirty (65.20%) of the prescriptions for antipsychotics were started by
a psychiatrist. These included 12 (26.10%) started in HMP Low Newton
during the current period of imprisonment; three (6.50%) had been
started in another prison but during the current period of imprisonment,
and 15 (32.5%) had been started in the community or during a previous
period of imprisonment. Sixteen (34.80%) prescriptions were prescribed
by a general practitioner (GP) or primary care services.

.. _sec4-6:

Polypharmacy
------------

One patient was prescribed aripiprazole for hyperprolactinaemia in
addition to zuclopenthixol. Only seven patients (15.2%) were not
prescribed any additional psychotropic medications.

The amounts and types of other psychotropic medications prescribed are
summarised below (`Tables 4 <#tab04>`__ and `5 <#tab05>`__). Table
4Number of additional psychotropics prescribedAdditional
psychotropicsNo. of patients07127210324050 Table 5Type of additional
psychotropics prescribedType of drugNo. of patientsNo. of
scriptsSpecific agentScripts for
agentAntidepressant2932Mirtazapine13Sertraline7Trazadone4Fluoxetine3Venlafaxine2Amitriptyline1Duloxetine1Paroxetine1Opiates1414Methadone13Subutex1Benzodiazepine22Clonazepam2Mood
stabilisers/anticonvulsants33Depakote1Lamotrigine2Stimulants22Atomoxetine1Dexamphetamine1

One patient was prescribed a total of five psychotropic medications,
comprising zuclopenthixol depot injection, aripiprazole, atomoxetine,
sertraline and clonazepam. This patient had been returned to prison from
a medium secure unit and had a diagnosis of emotionally unstable
personality disorder (EUPD) and attention-deficit hyperactivity
disorder.

One patient was prescribed three psychotropic medications (duloxetine,
lamotrigine and buprenorphine) in addition to quetiapine. Medication had
been started in HMP New Hall, and the diagnosis recorded was depression
and EUPD.

.. _sec4-7:

Indication and diagnosis
------------------------

The BNF licensed indications for each of the prescribed antipsychotics
prescribed are summarised in `Table 6 <#tab06>`__. Table 6BNF licence
indication for each antipsychotic prescribedBNF licence
indicationAripiprazoleChlorpromazineFlupenthixolOlanzapineQuetiapine
(inc modified
release)RisperidoneSulprideZuclopenthixolSchizophrenia/psychosisxxxxxxxxManiaxxxxxShort-term
management of agitation/excitement/anxietyxxDepressionxxBipolar
prophylaxisxNausea/vomiting/tics/hiccupShort-term use for aggression in
patients with Alzheimer'sx

Patient notes were reviewed to identify recorded diagnoses or
indications for each patient who had been prescribed an antipsychotic.
The reasons recorded in the notes are summarised in `Tables
7 <#tab07>`__ and `8 <#tab08>`__. Table 7Documented indication for each
antipsychotic medication in the
notesQuetiapineOlanzapineRisperidoneSulprideFlupenthixolAripiprazoleChlorpromazineZuclopenthixolTotalEUPD1042111120EUPD + PTSD213EUPD + depression112EUPD + psychosis22\ **Psychosis/schizophrenia**\ 23117\ **Drug-induced
psychosis**\ 33\ **Bipolar**\ 213\ **Mood
stabilisation**\ 213\ **Depression**\ 0\ **Psychotic
depression**\ 11\ **Anxiety/ paranoia**\ 112\ **Number**\ 201631221146
Table 8Licenced versus off-label indications documented in the notes for
each antipsychotic prescriptionAntipsychotic (*N*)Licensed indication
(*N*)Off-label indication (*N*)Quetiapine (20)Depression
(1)Anxiety/paranoia(1)Psychosis/schizophrenia (2)EUPD (10)Bipolar
(2)EUPD + PTSD(2)Mood stabilisation (2)Olanzapine
(16)Psychosis/schizophrenia (5)EUPD (4)Drug-induced psychosis
(3)EUPD + PTSD (1)Anxiety/paranoia (1)Bipolar (1)Depression
(1)Risperidone (3)EUPD (2)Psychotic depression (1)Sulpride (2)EUPD
(1)Anxiety/paranoia (1)Flupenthixol (2)Psychosis/schizophrenia (1)EUPD
(1)Aripiprazole (1)Psychosis (1) (hyperprolactinaemia)Chlorpromazine
(1)EUPD (1)Zuclopenthixol depot (1)EUPD (1)

Less than a third (13/46 = 28.3%) of the prescriptions for
antipsychotics were for psychosis (including affective psychoses), and
three were for bipolar affective disorder. The remainder were for
non-psychotic conditions.

Sixteen of the 46 prescriptions were within the licensed indications. Of
the 30 (65.2%) that were prescribed for off-label indications, half
(15/30 = 50%) were quetiapine (`Table 9 <#tab09>`__). Fisher's exact
test was used to determine the significance of this and gave a *P*-value
of 0.3496, which is below the typical cut-off for statistical
significance (*P* < 0.05). Table 9Number of off label prescriptions for
quetiapine in comparison to other antipsychoticsLicensed
indicationOff-label indicationQuetiapine515Other drugs1115

Two-thirds of the prescriptions where non-licensed indications were
recorded in relation to quetiapine were for EUPD (10/15 = 66.6%), plus
additional two for EUPD and post-traumatic stress disorder
(12/15 = 80%).

.. _sec4-8:

Contact with mental health team
-------------------------------

The average length of time between arrival in HMP Low Newton and review
by the mental health team was 30.2 days (range 0–310 days). This is
summarised further in `Fig. 2 <#fig02>`__. The average number of days
between arrival and review for the seven patients who were seen more
than 31 days after coming to HMP Low Newton was 166 days, which suggests
that these patients tended to have longer sentences and did not present
with symptoms until later in their sentences. Of the 46 patients, 36 had
been reviewed by a psychiatrist, five were on the waiting list to be
seen, one had declined input as they felt mentally stable and four had
no follow-up planned. The average time between review by the mental
health team and review by a psychiatrist was 87.97 days. This is broken
down further in `Fig. 3 <#fig03>`__. Fig. 2Length of time between
arrival in HMP Low Newton and review by the mental health team Fig.
3Length of time between review with the mental health team and review
with a psychiatrist

Of the five patients on the waiting list for the psychiatrist, four had
been seen by the mental health team for the first time in the 10 days
prior to the sample collection date (14 March 2018). One patient had
been on the waiting list since January 2018 and had been waiting 8 weeks
so far for an appointment. Of the four patients that had not been seen
by the psychiatrist and were also not on the waiting list to be seen,
50% (2/4) continued to be followed up by the mental health team. All
four of these patients were prescribed quetiapine which had been
commenced prior to coming to prison. The characteristics of these four
patients are outlined in more detail in `Table 10 <#tab10>`__. Table
10The characteristics of the 4 patients prescribed antipsychotic
medications but not under psychiatrist reviewPatient 1Patient 2Patient
3Patient 4Age (years)36354935Time in HMP Low Newton
(days)12014116313\ **Received from**\ HMP New
HallCommunityCommunityCommunity\ **Antipsychotic**\ QuetiapineQuetiapineQuetiapineQuetiapine\ **Other
psychotropics**\ MirtazapineMethadonenilMirtazapine\ **Antipsychotics
commenced**\ Prior to receptionPrior to receptionPrior to receptionPrior
to reception\ **Diagnosis**\ EUPDPsychotic episodeEUPDAnxiety,
depression, antisocial personality disorder\ **Follow-up by mental
health team**\ NoNoYesYes

.. _sec5:

Summary of findings
===================

On the day of the survey, 46/336 prisoners (13.7%) were prescribed
antipsychotic medications.No patients were prescribed high-dose
antipsychotics.Only one patient was prescribed more than one
antipsychotic, and the rationale for this was clearly stated.Twenty-nine
of the 46 patients (84.8%) were prescribed other psychotropic
medications, most commonly an antidepressant and/or an opiate.Two
patients (4.34%) were prescribed four or more psychotropic medications.
Both of these had diagnoses of EUPD.Approximately a third of
prescriptions were initiated by primary care/GP.Of the 65.2% of
prescriptions initiated by psychiatrists, approximately half were
started during the current period of imprisonment.Quetiapine was the
most frequently prescribed antipsychotic and was also the most likely to
be prescribed for off-label indications.Less than a third of all
antipsychotic prescriptions were prescribed to treat psychotic
disorders.The most common non-licensed indication for antipsychotics
being prescribed was EUPD, which accounted for approximately half of all
the prescriptions.The average length of time between arrival in HMP Low
Newton and review by the mental health team was 30 days, with the
majority being seen in less than 7 days.Forty-one of the 46 patients
(89.1%) had prior or planned appointments with the psychiatrist.

.. _sec6:

Discussion
==========

This review identified a number of positive findings: no patient was
prescribed high-dose antipsychotic therapy; only one patient was
prescribed combination antipsychotic therapy, and in this case the
second agent was commenced for a side-effect of the first and had been
initiated by a psychiatrist who remained involved in the patient's care.
The majority of patients were reviewed by the mental health team with 7
days of reception and had prior or planed appointments with the
psychiatrist to review their medication.

The review highlighted a high rate of off-label prescriptions for
antipsychotic medication within the prison. The study confirmed that
this was particularly the case with quetiapine, which, given the high
rates of misuse of this drug within the prison, is of concern. Although
there was no clear reason for this, one can speculate that, owing to the
high number of female prisoners reporting difficulties with ‘mood’ and
‘voices’, quetiapine is chosen because of its reported benefits in
relation to ‘mood stabilisation’, as well as its antipsychotic effects.
There is also, however, a likelihood that this medication is often
requested by the prisoners for its ‘tradeable’ status and potential for
misuse.\ :sup:`11`

There is a high rate of polypharmacy in relation to psychotropic
medication, which can increase the risk of side-effects and physical
health complications. All but two of the patients were prescribed no
more than three psychotropic agents. Again, this is likely to be due in
part to a high rate of comorbid substance misuse within the prison
population. Furthermore, there is a tendency for patients to prefer
medication over alternative treatments such as psychological
intervention.

Psychological therapies are identified as the primary treatment for
patients with personality disorder.\ :sup:`4` At HMP Low Newton, a
variety of psychological services are available. These include the
12-bedded Primrose Unit, for women with severe personality disorder,
which forms part of the Offender Personality Disorder Pathway, and a
Psychologically Informed Planned Environment wing. The prison forensic
psychology services offer a range of assessments and treatments, and the
scope of this work is driven by consultancy with offender management
units and offender managers within the community. Finally, there is the
prison mental health team, who work in line with trauma-informed care
principles and can offer a range of individual and group therapies.
However, there is often a waiting list for such services, and
potentially suitable prisoners often do not remain within the prison
long enough to start and complete identified treatments before release
or transfer.

Although a large proportion of the prescriptions were issued by a
psychiatrist, it is noted that approximately half were commenced in
either in the community or during a different prison sentence.
Therefore, it is possible that some patients are reissued prescriptions
without a thorough review of need, current mental state and other
prescribed treatments. Also, the records indicate that often little
consideration is given to whether the patient has adhered to medication
in the community and so, often, this is simply re-prescribed if it is on
the GP summary. The guidelines in relation to use of antipsychotic
medications for minor symptoms, such as anxiety, stress or agitation,
are clear that it should be a short-term measure only. However, such
prescriptions are often continued for prolonged periods without a
critical review. This tendency may be exacerbated in the prison
population by transfers to other establishments, early release, failures
to engage with the mental health team, and a relative lack of attention
paid to the initial timing and indications for prescribing.

.. _sec7:

Recommendations
===============

The patient's diagnosis and/or the indication for each prescription
should be clearly recorded at the point of prescription in the running
case record and in the medication section of the electronic notes
system.In order to reduce the rate of off-label prescribing, all
patients arriving at the prison who are prescribed antipsychotic
medication on or shortly after reception should be brought to the
attention of the psychiatrist and the mental health team manager.All of
these patients should be allocated to a secondary care worker and given
an appointment to see the team psychiatrist.The secondary care nurse
should obtain all relevant past records.The psychiatrist should conduct
an initial case review note and advise on either withdrawing or
continuing antipsychotic medication prior to the review.Particular
attention should be given to patients who have a primary diagnosis of
EUPD, particularly those for whom antipsychotics have been prescribed
for the relief of minor symptoms, such as stress, anxiety and insomnia.
The presumption should be that medications for these reasons should only
be prescribed in the short term, and this should be clearly explained to
the patient.Care should also be taken with patients who have a history
of substance misuse, or of secreting and hoarding medication, as this
often indicates involvement in trading.If patients have not adhered to
antipsychotic medication in the community, then it should not be
automatically re-prescribed on reception without review by the mental
health team or psychiatrist.Prescriptions for quetiapine should be kept
under regular review and withdrawn unless there are clear reasons for
continuing to prescribe.This review should be repeated after a year to
assess the effects of these measures on off-label prescribing.

**Lois Carey** is a consultant forensic psychiatrist at Roseberry Park
Hospital, Middlesbrough, UK. **Stephen Barlow** is a consultant forensic
psychiatrist at Roseberry Park Hospital, Middlesbrough, UK.

L.C. had a substantial role in the design of the study, acquisition and
analysis of the data, and drafting and revising the work. S.B. had a
substantial role in the design of the study, in addition to drafting and
revising the work.

.. _nts3:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. _sec8:

Supplementary material
----------------------

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2020.80.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material
