=============================================================
Friston's free energy principle: new life for psychoanalysis?
=============================================================

:Author: Jeremy HolmesCorrespondence to Jeremy Holmes
         (j.a.holmes@btinternet.com)
:Date: 2022-06
:Abstract:
   The free energy principle (FEP) is a new paradigm that has gain
   widespread interest in the neuroscience community. Although its
   principal architect, Karl Friston, is a psychiatrist, it has thus far
   had little impact within psychiatry. This article introduces readers
   to the FEP, points out its consilience with Freud's neuroscientific
   ideas and with psychodynamic practice, and suggests ways in which the
   FEP can help explain the mechanisms of action of the psychotherapies.


pmc
Today's psychiatrists are pragmatists, on the look-out for what ‘works’
and sceptical about the grand theories that held sway in the previous
century. But ideology cannot be wholly avoided, nor theoretical
controversy evaded. Current psychiatry's pantheon incudes evidence-based
practice, DSM diagnosis and neuroscience. The search for evidence is
theory driven. Diagnostic profusion raises questions about the
medicalisation of human suffering. Despite extraordinary recent advances
in neuroscience, their impact on everyday psychiatric practice has been
modest.

The purpose of this article is twofold: first, to introduce readers to
an overarching model of brain function associated with the mathematical
psychiatrist Karl Friston, the free energy principle (FEP), which has
been influential in neuroscience generally, but thus far has caused
relatively little stir within psychiatry or clinical psychology. My hope
is to redress that. Second, I make the case that FEP can revitalise the
psychoanalytic psychotherapies, marginalised by the inexorable rise of
cognitive–behavioural therapy (CBT) as the dominant psychological
therapy paradigm.

It should be noted that FEP is deliberately described by Friston as a
‘principle’, akin to the principles of natural selection or gravity. The
evidence for its validity is circumstantial rather than direct, and its
detailed neuronal mechanisms and clinical implications remain to be
fully explored.

.. _sec1:

Friston's forebears
===================

Friston's project builds on the work of a number of pioneering
predecessors and their concepts. These include Erwin Schrödinger,
Heinrich Helmholtz, the Claudes – Claude Bernard and Claude Shannon –
and Thomas Bayes. We live in an entropic universe. Broken cups don't
spontaneously reassemble. Coffee cools once poured. Stars burn out. The
exception is life itself. Quantum physicist Schrödinger\ :sup:`1` coined
the term ‘negentropy’ to describe how living matter, Canute-like for its
lifetime, reverses this cosmic tide towards disorder and homogeneity.

The key to negentropy is homeostasis. As Bernard famously put it, the
condition of a free life is the stability of the interior milieu –
whether one is a unicellular amoeba or, like Schrödinger, a Nobel-prize
winning primate. Homeostasis, and the more general processes of
allostasis,\ :sup:`2` resist the forces of entropy, physiologically and
behaviourally. Inherent in homeostasis are boundaries: cell membranes,
the skin, the brain within its skull. Janus-like, homeostasis faces
outwards towards the environment and inwards towards the *milieu
interieur*. Temperature sensors in the skin tell us it's a hot day; the
sympathetic nervous system activates sweat glands, the brain tells us to
fling off jumpers, move into the shade, etc., all in the service of
resisting being entropically fried. Note that homeostats vary in
‘precision’ – some are highly sensitive, whereas others tolerate a great
range of variation.

Friston had the insight and mathematical sophistication to see that the
negentropic homeostatic principle applies not just to the organism as a
whole but to the brain itself.\ :sup:`3,4` The brain's job is to
counteract entropy and to maintain internal stability on behalf of the
organism whose processes and behaviour it controls and directs; this
applies, reflexively, to itself.

The FEP goes back to the ideas of 19th-century polymath Hermann von
Helmholtz, updated by artificial intelligence (AI) neuroscientists
Geoffrey Hinton and Peter Dayan.\ :sup:`5` Naively, we tend to think of
vision as a camera-like image passively projected onto the visual
cortex, or the auditory system as microphone-like, responding
indiscriminatingly to the prevailing phonic universe. In the Helmholtz
model the *brain makes its own world*. Our sense organs, external and
internal, are constantly bombarded by a vast range of stimuli from an
ever-changing environment. To operate with maximum efficiency, the brain
selects out the ‘meaning’ of its sensations, attending only to those
that are relevant to its ‘affordances’\ :sup:`6` – its specific
ecological niche – and especially to input that is anomalous or novel.

Working in the 1950s at the Bell telephone company laboratory, Claude
Shannon saw that this ‘meaning’ could be quantified – as ‘bits’ of
information. Gregory Bateson, anthropologist and family therapy guru,
called these ‘differences that make a difference’. White noise is
chaotic, entropic and devoid of information. Language, whether spoken,
sung or gestured, is structured, ordered, negentropic. The measure of
informational energy is ‘surprise’, i.e. how unexpected a signal is. In
the board game Scrabble, the letter ‘x’ conveys more information than
‘e’ because it is relatively unusual, applying to a smaller range of
words, and so in calculating the score, is ‘worth’ more. The brain's aim
is constantly to reduce informational entropy and maximise meaning.

A crucial building block for the FEP is the concept of the Bayesian
brain. The Reverend Thomas Bayes, a late 18th-century clergyman and
founder of probability theory, grasped, Doris Day-like, that the
future's not ours to see. Yet, to survive and adapt we need to know,
moment to moment, ‘what is going on’ – in ourselves, in the
interpersonal world and in the physical world. On the basis of prior
experience, the Bayesian brain\ :sup:`7` continuously estimates the
likelihood of future events. Probabilities are computed by comparing
current states of affairs with past occurrences, estimating the extent
of correspondence between them, factoring in the likelihood of errors in
both memory and perception, and ending with a portion that represents
that which cannot be predicted. This is ‘prediction error’, which must,
in the service of negentropy, be minimised as far as is possible –
prediction error minimisation or PEM.

The brain, ‘top-down’, uses Bayesian probabilities to clarify
‘bottom-up’ input, extero- and interocaptive::sup:`8` ‘My stomach is
complaining, but it's not surprising – I overdid it on the pudding, so
it's probably not cancer’; ‘I know that tune, I've heard it so many
times – yes of course, it's the Beatles’ Yellow Submarine’; ‘Is that a
stick or a snake? Come on, no adders in city centres, probably safe to
pick it up’.

.. _sec2:

Free energy
===========

Now to the free energy principle itself. ‘Energy’ equates to
information, albeit physically embodied in patterns of neuronal
impulses, synaptic transmission (‘fire together, wire
together’\ :sup:`9`) and the neurohormonal environment. Prior models of
the world, top-down, ‘bind’ incoming bottom-up information. Energy
*un*\ bound, or prediction error, reflects novelty in need of binding –
and so forestall the dangers of entropic chaos.

Circumstantial evidence for the FEP is the fact that more neuronal
fibres reach the eye downwards from the brain than travel upward towards
the visual cortex. Whenever possible, the brain ‘tells’ the eye what it
is likely to be seeing. The FEP postulates a hierarchical series of
neuronal interactions, starting from the least to the most complex, from
the periphery to the central nervous system, from specificity to
abstraction, most of which operate below conscious awareness. At the
level of the eye itself the retinal receptors are activated: ‘round, two
dots and a straight line between’. Top-down, even in a 1-month baby,
this will elicit an answering smile (‘face equals security’). Once
language arrives, verbal concepts shape perceptions: ‘Oh of course,
that's a face’. At the highest level is mentalising – thinking about
thinking: ‘I wonder why bearded faces always make me feel slightly
unsettled? Perhaps it's reminiscent of my scary grandfather’.

The FEP visualises a series of ‘conversations’ in which top-down
‘priors’ ‘bind’ bottom-up input into probabilistically recognisable
meanings. Each level can be thought of as a meaning–action boundary.
Ascending the hierarchy, the Bayesian process ensures that the most
mathematically probable pattern prevails across these statistical
boundaries or ‘Markov blankets’.\ :sup:`10` Prediction error is
minimised by ‘binding’ bottom-up energy (informational as well as
physiological) by top-down generative models based on pre-existing
patterns and concepts. Thus is order preserved, entropy eschewed. We
know what we like and, mostly, see what we want and expect to see.

But there will always be a discrepancy between our pre-existing models
of the world and incoming sensations, an excess of energy that cannot be
bound and will have to be passed onto the next level up of the
hierarchy. Lockdown excepted, we don't live huddled in ‘dark
rooms’.\ :sup:`11` The environment is constantly in flux; we need to
explore as much as conserve – to find new sources of food, suitable
mates, interest and excitement. Surprise, calibrated by the brain as the
discrepancy between expectation and incoming sensation, is a proxy for
free energy – and hence entropy. Surprise is both vital to survival but
also potentially entropic, disruptive or even life-threatening. This
represents the prediction error aforementioned. The brain minimises such
surprise/error by whatever means possible.

At this point the role of affect becomes important. Free energy is
aversive and can be thought of as representing mental pain. Conversely,
‘binding’ free energy is rewarding and therefore motivating. The role of
affect, positive and negative, is to drive the free energy minimising
processes. This is another ‘AI’ – active inference.

The idea of active inference captures a number of psychological
processes central to psychological health. First, action or agency.
Given that incoming stimuli are inherently subject to error and
imprecision, the brain increases precision by movement – approaching an
ambiguous stimulus source, turning the head to use foveal rather than
peripheral vision, switching lights on in order to see better, etc.
Second, top-down model revision. Now we know what that vague shape
really ‘is’ – a cat, clothes strewn on the floor, etc.: ‘Let's listen
more carefully. Oh, that's not the Beatles at all, it's the Beach Boys’.
Third, and vitally in the case of social species such as our own, active
inference is enhanced by recruiting help or ‘twogetherness’: ‘Did you
hear something, or was I just imagining it?’; ‘You know about ’70s music
– what was that group's name?’. Friston & Frith call this ‘duets for
one’ and have worked out the mathematics of such collaborative Markov
blankets.\ :sup:`12` Fourth, if all else fails, by choosing or
fashioning environments that conform to the brain's pre-existing models
of the word: ‘I can't stand modern music. Let's go over to Classic FM’.
This last aspect is captured by the psychoanalytic concept of
‘projective identification’, in which we shape our interpersonal world,
often deleteriously, to conform with expectations: ‘You psychiatrists
are all the same – never there when I need you’.

.. _sec3:

Free energy and psychopathology
===============================

The FEP has clear implications for those who work in mental ill health,
and especially who favour psychological methods of treatment. Consider
depression, typically triggered by loss, trauma or multiple setbacks.
Adversity is widespread – poverty, inequality, racism – but not all
succumb. To understand resilience, we need an illness model that
encompasses not just events, but individuals’ responses to them.
Attachment research shows that those who are securely attached are able
to repair the inevitable ruptures to which all are prone, often through
the typical sequence of protest, rage, grief and mourning.\ :sup:`13` As
children, securely attached people have had caregivers they could depend
on to acknowledge their pain, tolerate protest and help them to move on.
Repeated episodes of everyday rupture–repair cycles help build this
resilience.

The free energy released by the rupture is bound by the child's
knowledge that help is at hand and that their epistemically trusted
caregiver will provide a generative model to counteract the free energy
associated with ruptures: ‘Don't worry love, I'm just going to the loo,
I'll be back in a minute’. In the ‘still face’ paradigm, parents are
asked to freeze their facial expression for 1 minute while talking or
playing with their child.\ :sup:`14` Securely attached children continue
actively to try to re-engage with their caregivers in the confident
expectation that they will be ‘back soon’. For insecurely attached
children, by contrast, rather than rupture–repair, cycles of
rupture–despair or rupture–disappear are the norm. Their caregivers have
either themselves been overwhelmed by their child's unhappiness and so
despairingly abandon attempts to alleviate it; or repress the impact of
the child's mental pain and so ‘disappear’ emotionally. Both leave the
child alone to find ways to bind the free energy the rupture evokes.
When their caregiver's face freezes they look away, become miserable and
regressed, and often resort to self-soothing rituals such as rocking or
emotional dissociation.

Such insecurely attached children are primed in later life for
depression in response to loss or trauma or, in extreme cases, to
developing post-traumatic stress disorder. The ingredients of free
energy minimisation needed to maintain psychological equilibrium are for
them problematic. Active inference is compromised. They tend to be
passive rather than active. They stick with limited and simplistic and
inflexible ‘top-down’ models such as ‘It's no use trying to make things
better, it never works’ or ‘Feelings are dangerous, best to keep them
buried’. They find it hard to trust people and so can't ‘borrow’ an
intimate other's brain with which to process feelings and build up
alternative ways of viewing the world.

.. _sec4:

Psychotherapeutic implications
==============================

The most commonly used therapy for depression, CBT, attempts to address
these deficiencies. Therapists encourage patients actively to test their
negative ‘hypotheses’ by looking more closely at their experiences and
by exploring alternative top-down models to account for them (‘Maybe my
boyfriend didn't answer his phone because he'd run out of battery, not
because he doesn't love me’). But CBT has its limitations.
‘Treatment-resistant depression’ is common.\ :sup:`15` People with
personality disorders do badly with standard CBT, often refusing to
engage or dropping out.\ :sup:`16` The FEP provides explanations for
this. From an FEP perspective, one way to minimise free energy is to
gravitate towards or engender environments that confirm one's view of
the world, however negative. Depression relegates sufferers to
emotionally impoverished relationships, stereotyped and simplistic
top-down models, and thus becomes a self-fulfilling hypothesis,
resistant to psychotherapeutic interventions. In addition, these
negative top-down priors are ‘inferentially inert’, i.e. inaccessible
for modification.

A degree of chaos/uncertainty/free energy needs to be tolerated before
new generative models can evolve. Homeostatic imprecision needs to be
tolerated for a while. The holding and ‘negative capability’ of the
therapist's ‘borrowed brain’ paves the way for a more complex, nuanced
top-down reset. Given that people with personality disorders notoriously
find it difficult to trust others, the brevity and defocus on the
therapeutic relationship in standard CBT limits the scope for such
fundamental change.

Moving from depression to an FEP perspective on trauma, the latter
creates an overwhelming influx of free energy for which there are no
available top-down models with which to bind it. Thoughts of cruelty,
neglect and abuse remain in the realm of the unthinkable and are
therefore ‘defended against’ by repression or dissociation.\ :sup:`17`
However, when jointly considered – under a shared Markov blanket – these
bottom-up unprocessed experiences can be bound with the therapist's
encouragement and expertise into manageable narratives. However painful,
they become less overwhelming, a source of new ways of thinking and
psychic reorganisation. As the patient begins to feel that the therapist
is safe, reliable, compassionate and empathic, so everyday ruptures –
session-endings, holiday breaks and misunderstandings – are repeatedly
repaired via model revision (‘Maybe the weekend break does not
inevitably mean I'm forgotten’), and the trust this engenders can be
generalised into the patient's everyday life.

We can see here how contemporary psychoanalytic psychotherapy and
revitalised Freudian ideas resonate with the FEP. Freud started off his
working life as a neurologist. Like Friston, he conceptualised the
brain's aim as reducing psychic energy, typically through action and
‘word representations’ – i.e. transmuting free energy into thinkable
thoughts. He saw unbound energy (which he later transmuted into
‘libido’) as potentially disruptive and responsible for the symptoms of
psychological illness. Psychoanalysis was designed first to evoke and
then to quieten this trauma-related unbound energy. To achieve this,
three key psychoanalytic procedures are free association, dream analysis
and analysis of transference.

The ‘virtual’ nature of the psychoanalytic relationship brings both
top-down and bottom-up components of the FEP process into focus,
enabling them to be mentalised rather than enacted. Free association
taps into the mind's normally unvoiced upward-welling stream of
consciousness, counteracting the elusiveness of affect seen in the
rupture–despair/disappear attachment pattern. This enables the range of
top-down responses to be enhanced and aversive free energy minimised. At
the top-down level, in a process comparable to the immune system's
lexicon of antigen-activated antibodies, dreaming is the means by which
the mind generates a repertoire of narratives with which to bind the
free energy which life's vicissitudes engender. Transference analysis
turns the spotlight on the limited varieties of top-down narratives that
sufferers use in their dealings with intimate others to minimise free
energy. The enigmatic ambiguity of therapists’ persona enables patients
to experience, reconsider and extend the top-down assumptions with which
they approach the world of intimate others.

Psychoanalysis has tended to self-isolation, sequestrated from
cross-fertilisation by other disciplines. The Friston–Freud consilience
opens up new possibilities. Psychoanalytic and attachment-derived
mentalisation-based therapy (MBT) is now established as a highly
effective therapy for borderline personality disorder, previously
considered untreatable.\ :sup:`18` MBT leads to big reductions in
medication use, suicide attempts, hospital admission and unemployment
among people with borderline personality disorder, as compared with
treatment as usual.

MBT is both practically and conceptually consistent with the FEM. It
encourages patients (a) to identify the bottom-up feelings that fuel
their self-injurious actions, (b) to pause and think of different ways
of handling these, i.e. to tolerate a quantum of free energy with the
help of the therapists’ ‘borrowed brain’ and (c) through mutual
mentalising (therapist and patient together forming a neurobiological
‘bubble’) to generate more complex and adaptive models of the self and
significant others. The result is manageable surprise: confounding
sufferers’ negative assumptions about the world, becoming less
overwhelmed by unbound affect (fewer ‘melt-downs’) and facilitating
greater resilience.

.. _sec5:

Conclusions
===========

If rehabilitation of the psychoanalytic method in the light of the FEP
comes as a pleasant surprise, this is consistent with its principles. As
in Mark Twain's trope, rumours of psychoanalysis's death have been
greatly exaggerated. In place of despair or disappearance, the FEP
suggests that repair is possible. FEP-grounded psychoanalytic approaches
such as MBT are now known to help those with profound mental distress.
They also suggest a scientifically sound account of the interpersonal
and neuronal mechanisms by which psychological change comes about.

**Jeremy Holmes** is a retired psychiatrist and psychoanalytic
psychotherapist. He is a Visiting Professor at Exeter University, UK,
and author of many articles and books in the field of attachment theory
and psychoanalysis, including *The Brain Has a Mind of Its Own:
Attachment, Neurobiology, and the New Science of Psychotherapy*, in
which the ideas of this article are explored in greater detail.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

.. _nts3:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.
