========================================================================================================================
Views on psychotherapy research among members of the Medical Psychotherapy Faculty of the Royal College of Psychiatrists
========================================================================================================================



Marcella Fok
Tennyson Lee
Jessica Yakeley

:Correspondence: Dr Marcella Fok (marcella.fok@nhs.net)

:date: 2022-04

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   Research drives innovation and improved practice in psychotherapy. We
   describe views of members of the Faculty of Medical Psychotherapy of
   the Royal College of Psychiatrists (RCPsych) regarding their
   knowledge, experience and perspectives on psychotherapy research. We
   sent questionnaires to the Faculty membership emailing list.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   In total, 172 psychiatrists from all levels of training returned
   fully complete responses. Respondents considered knowledge of
   psychotherapy research to be important to clinical work. Many have
   qualifications and experience in research but lack current
   opportunities for research involvement and would welcome the Faculty
   doing more to promote psychotherapy research. Perceived obstacles to
   research involvement included lack of competence, competing demands
   and wider organisational factors.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   The lack of research opportunities for medical psychotherapists may
   lead to their underrepresentation in psychotherapy research and a
   less medically informed research agenda. Providing support at
   academic, RCPsych and National Health Service organisational levels
   will allow more clinically relevant research not only in
   psychotherapy but in other psychiatric disciplines as well.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Research is a cornerstone of psychiatry in all its areas of knowledge,
understanding and practice. As a branch of psychiatry, psychotherapy
needs research. Although cognitive–behavioural therapy has been
considerably researched, the relationship of psychoanalytic
psychotherapy to research is complicated. Within psychiatry and among
the public, there are common perceptions of psychoanalytic psychotherapy
as unscientific and psychotherapists as uninterested in research.

Let us begin by outlining the issue: what is the problem regarding
research in psychotherapy? There is evidence that psychoanalytic
psychotherapy services within the public sector in the UK have been
disproportionately reduced compared with other mental health
services.\ :sup:`1` This may be due to a lack of a robust evidence base
in psychoanalytically oriented psychotherapy compared with other
modalities, such as cognitive–behavioural therapy. However, high-quality
research in psychoanalytic psychotherapy can substantially advance our
knowledge of the efficacy of treatment of different mental
disorders.\ :sup:`2` Within the psychoanalytic community a lack of
understanding and interest in research persists;\ :sup:`3,4` this is
reinforced by a (real and perceived) split in the community between
academics, who do research, and clinicians, who see patients. Many of
the trials in psychodynamic psychotherapy have lacked sufficient
methodological rigour and do not necessarily reflect real-life
practice.\ :sup:`5`

Among psychoanalytic psychotherapists, resistance to research is driven
by several factors. Research methods (such as manualisation of
treatments, randomisation of patients, recording of sessions,
administering outcome measures) are often seen as interfering with
clinical technique and practice. Practising therapists may have a poor
understanding of the research currency of statistics and numbers and end
up finding research activity mindless and meaningless. Moreover,
research is treated with suspicion, as it may challenge established and
cherished theories.\ :sup:`5`

Nevertheless, there are strong reasons for psychotherapists to engage in
research. We need first to investigate the efficacy and outcomes of
psychotherapy, to ascertain whether change does occur with treatment,
and second to investigate the process of therapy, to understand what
happens in therapy and how change occurs. We also need to ensure the
safety and quality of treatment and to explore patients’ experiences of
psychotherapy. As for commissioners, patients and the public, their
expectation of research engagement and the evidence base for
psychotherapy needs to be satisfied. Finally, research is an effective
means of interrogating new and existing theories and of communicating
with colleagues.

One should bear in mind that psychiatric practice involves at its heart
the use of a therapeutic relationship, and research into aspects of this
relationship can reap useful and highly applicable rewards.\ :sup:`6–8`
The relative sparsity of research in this area reflects the current
dominance of the biomedical paradigm within psychiatry. The predominance
of cognitive–behavioural therapy, alongside the biomedical paradigm, has
played a part in the neglect of psychotherapy research among
psychiatrists.

The Faculty of Medical Psychotherapy of the Royal College of
Psychiatrists has a membership consisting of psychiatrists who practise
psychotherapy as their main therapy or use its principles in their work,
as well as psychiatrists who may not be practising psychotherapy but
have an interest in the subject. Among those practising psychotherapy,
different modalities of therapy may be used; however, psychoanalytic
psychotherapy is the main modality in which the majority of medical
psychotherapists have been trained. The Faculty is interested in
research and is exploring ways of promoting psychotherapy research.

In this study, we surveyed our membership, with the aim of describing
psychiatrists’ views on research in psychotherapy and their experiences
in engaging with research.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

.. _sec1-1:

Design
------

A web-based survey was designed by the two joint Research Leads (M.F.
and T.L.) of the Faculty of Medical Psychotherapy. The Chair and
Vice-Chair of the Faculty were consulted in the design of questions and
response options. The College Registrar gave approval to the final
version of the survey before its distribution to Faculty members. Survey
responses were anonymous.

The survey consisted of 26 questions and covered the following areas:
general respondent characteristics (member group, current post, work
location)views on the importance of psychotherapy researchways of
learning about psychotherapy researchsatisfaction with their own
knowledge of psychotherapy research and interest in gaining
knowledgeresearch experienceopportunities for, and obstacles to
involvement in, psychotherapy researchviews on the Faculty's interest
and involvement in researchsuggestions to the Faculty regarding
promoting psychotherapy researchsuggestions to support trainees in
psychotherapy research.

The format of the questions varied (Appendix) and some questions asked
for additional free-text responses. The survey was written and hosted on
SurveyHero and was sent out via email to the entire Faculty membership
(3842 UK members and 827 overseas members). The email contained a brief
message introducing the survey and the reason for doing it, and a direct
link to the survey webpage. The email was sent in August 2019 by the
College Faculty and Committee Manager. A reminder email was sent before
closure at the end of September 2019.

.. _sec1-2:

Participants
------------

All Faculty members, including psychiatrists at all levels of training
and experience, were emailed about the survey.

.. _sec1-3:

Analysis
--------

Only fully completed survey responses were included in the analysis.
Data were examined numerically and we also identified key themes in the
free-text responses.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

We emailed 4669 Faculty members about the survey; 501 persons viewed the
survey, and 246 responses were received before the closure date, of
which 172 were fully completed responses (i.e. all survey questions
answered). The participation rate (number responded out of number
viewed) was 49.1% and completion rate (number completed out of number
participated) was 69.9%. The response rate (number of responses out of
number who were emailed about the survey) was 5.2%. The characteristics
of the ‘completed’ respondents are shown in `Table 1 <#tab01>`__. Table
1Characteristics and responses for the ‘completed’ respondentsTotal
(*n* = 172)Consultant with CCT in medical psychotherapy
(*n* = 42)Consultant in other specialty (*n* = 60)Higher trainee in
medical psychotherapy or dual training incl. medical psychotherapy
(*n* = 14)Core trainee or higher trainee in other specialty
(*n* = 25)SAS\ :sup:`a` or other (*n* = 31)Medical psychotherapy
sessions form part of current postYes96 (56%)34 (81%)24 (40%)12 (86%)15
(60%)11 (35%)No76 (44%)8 (19%)36 (60%)2 (14%)10 (40%)20 (65%)Work
baseUK154 (90%)4150 (83%)132426 (84%)Outside UK18 (10%)110 (17%)115
16%)Do you agree that knowledge of psychotherapy research is important
for your work?Strongly agree109 (63%)29 (69%)36 (60%)10 (71%)13 (52%)21
(68%)Agree59 (34%)12 (29%)22 (37%)4 (29%)11 (44%)10 (32%)Neither agree
nor disagree2 (1%)02 (3%)000Disagree2 (1%)1 (2%)001 (4%)0Strongly
disagree000000Satisfaction with own level of knowledge of psychotherapy
researchVery satisfied9 (5%)4 (10%)1 (2%)004 (13%)Somewhat satisfied57
(33%)17 (40%)21 (35%)4 (29%)4 (16%)11 (35%)Neither satisfied nor
dissatisfied48 (28%)12 (29%)20 (33%)2 (14%)4 (16%)10 (32%)Somewhat
dissatisfied46 (27%)8 (19%)15 (25%)6 (43%)13 (52%)4 (13%)Very
dissatisfied12 (7%)1 (2%)3 (5%)2 (14%)4 (16%)2 (6%)Formal qualifications
in researchNone90 (52%)18 (43%)28 (47%)9 (64%)15 (60%)20 (65%)BSc22
(13%)5 (12%)9 (15%)1 (7%)6 (24%)1 (3%)Masters level31 (18%)12 (29%)10
(17%)4 (29%)2 (8%)3 (10%)Doctorate (PhD/MD)29 (17%)7 (17%)14 (23%)03
(12%)5 (16%)Other13 (8%)3 (7%)4 (7%)01 (4%)5 (16%)Has ever held paid
research postYes55 (32%)14 (33%)23 (38%)3 (21%)4 (16%)11 (35%)No117
(68%)28 (67%)37 (62%)11 (79%)21 (84%)20 (65%)Has published
non-psychotherapy researchYes97 (56%)27 (64%)34 (57%)3 (21%)13 (52%)20
(65%)No75 (44%)15 (36%)26 (43%)11 (79%)12 (48%)11 (35%)Has published
psychotherapy researchYes50 (29%)19 (45%)17 (28%)01 (4%)13 (42%)No122
(71%)23 (55%)43 (72%)14 (1000%)24 (96%)18 (58%)Has current opportunities
for involvement in psychotherapy researchYes39 (23%)12 (29%)12 (20%)6
(43%)4 (16%)5 (16%)No131 (76%)29 (69%)48 (80%)8 (57%)21 (84%)25
(81%)Blank2 (0%)1 (2%)01 (3%)Satisfaction with current opportunities for
involvement in psychotherapy researchVery satisfied15 (9%)4 (10%)4
(7%)007 (23%)Somewhat satisfied16 (9%)10 (24%)1 (2%)1 (7%)2 (8%)2
(6%)Neither satisfied nor dissatisfied71 (41%)15 (36%)29 (48%)4 (29%)9
(36%)14 (45%)Somewhat dissatisfied45 (26%)10 (24%)15 (25%)7 (50%)8
(32%)5 (16%)Very dissatisfied25 (15%)3 (7%)11 (18%)2 (14%)6 (24%)3
(10%)Perceives obstacles to getting more involved in psychotherapy
researchNo37 (22%)12 (29%)9 (15%)4 (29%)4 (16%)8 (26%)Yes135 (78%)30
(71%)51 (85%)10 (71%)21 (84%)23 (74%)In your opinion, is the Faculty of
Medical Psychotherapy adequately interested and involved in
research?No37 (22%)24 (57%)12 (20%)9 (64%)20 (80%)2 (6%)Yes15 (9%)3
(7%)6 (10%)0 (0)2 (3%)4 (13%)Unsure120 (70%)15 (36%)42 (70%)5 (36%)3
(12%)25 (81%)Would you like the Faculty of Medical Psychotherapy to do
more to promote psychotherapy research?No2 (1%)1 (2%)1 (2%)0 (0)0
(0)0Yes137 (80%)34 (81%)47 (78%)11 (79%)20 (80%)25 (81%)Unsure33 (19%)7
(17%)12 (20%)3 (21%)5 (20%)6 (19%) [1]_

.. _sec2-1:

Respondent characteristics
--------------------------

Of the 172 respondents, 18 (10%) were from outside the UK and the rest
were from within the UK; 42 (24%) were consultant psychiatrists with a
Certificate of Completion of Training (CCT) in Medical Psychotherapy; 60
(35%) were consultant psychiatrists of other specialties; 14 (8%) were
higher trainees in medical psychotherapy (including those in dual
training); 25 (15%) were core or higher trainees in other specialties;
and 31 (18%) were ‘SAS (Specialist and Associate Specialist) or other’
psychiatrists. Ninety-six respondents (56%) had medical psychotherapy
sessions as part of their current post. In terms of research
backgrounds, 82 of the respondents (48%) had some research qualification
(i.e. BSc, Masters or Doctorate level degree, or other, or a combination
of these); 97 (56%) had published non-psychotherapy research; 50 (29%)
had published psychotherapy research; and 44 (26%) had published both
types of research.

.. _sec2-2:

Views and knowledge of psychotherapy research
---------------------------------------------

When asked ‘Do you agree that knowledge of research is important for
your work?’, 168 respondents (97%) answered in the affirmative (‘agree’
or ‘strongly agree’). Respondents were asked to rate their satisfaction
with their own level of knowledge in psychotherapy research. Those who
had the highest level of satisfaction were consultants in medical
psychotherapy (50% were ‘somewhat’ or ‘very satisfied’), followed by SAS
or other psychiatrists (48%), consultants in other specialties (37%) and
higher trainees in medical psychotherapy (29%). Core and higher trainees
in other specialties had the lowest satisfaction rate (16%). Rates of
dissatisfaction (i.e. responses ‘somewhat’ or ‘very dissatisfied) ranked
almost in the reverse – highest among core and higher trainees in other
specialties (68%), followed by higher trainees in medical psychotherapy
(57%), consultants in other specialties (27%), consultants in medical
psychotherapy (21%) and SAS or other psychiatrists (19%).

Respondents were asked to report which method(s) they used (from five
given options and an option ‘other’) to gain knowledge in psychotherapy
research. The most common methods were attending conferences (79% of
respondents) and reading journals (78%), followed by discussion with
colleagues (69%) and using electronic resources (such as saved Google
scholar searches) (53%); 20% endorsed ‘involvement in psychotherapy
research activity’ as a way of gaining knowledge; 11% reported ‘other’.

.. _sec2-3:

Research experience
-------------------

Regarding experience in specific research activities, the most common
activities were literature review, data collection, and data cleaning or
analysis (each reported by 75% of respondents). Also fairly common were
writing papers (67%), study design or protocol writing (60%) and
recruiting research participants (53%). In total, 38% of respondents had
been involved in peer reviewing and 33% in delivering interventions in a
trial. Only 3% reported no involvement in any of these research
activities.

.. _sec2-4:

Opportunities for psychotherapy research
----------------------------------------

Thirty-nine respondents (23%) reported having current opportunities for
involvement in psychotherapy research – these respondents came from all
five member groups (12 consultants in other specialties; 12 consultants
in medical psychotherapy; 4 core and higher trainees in other
specialties; 6 higher trainees in medical psychotherapy; 5 other
psychiatrists).

On rating their current opportunities for involvement in psychotherapy
research, 71 respondents (41%) were neutral (neither satisfied nor
dissatisfied), 45 (26%) were somewhat dissatisfied and 25 (15%) were
very dissatisfied. Fewer respondents were somewhat satisfied (*n* = 16;
9%) or very satisfied (*n* = 15; 9%). Trainees reported higher levels of
dissatisfaction (i.e. either somewhat or very dissatisfied: 14 (56%)
core and higher trainees in other specialties and 9 (64%) higher
trainees in medical psychotherapy) than did non-trainee groups (26 (43%)
consultants in other specialties, 13 (31%) consultants in medical
psychotherapy, 8 (26%) other psychiatrists).

.. _sec2-5:

Obstacles to involvement in psychotherapy research
--------------------------------------------------

The majority of respondents perceived obstacles to becoming involved in
psychotherapy research (*n* = 135; 78%). Additional free-text responses
to this question were coded and assessed to identify specific themes.
The themes identified are shown in `Table 2 <#tab02>`__ and the
following selection of free-text responses. Table 2Perceived obstacles
to getting more involved in psychotherapy researchAge/retirementClinical
workloadLack of contacts or potential collaboratorsLack of
funding/infrastructure/research administrative supportLack of
knowledge/competence/confidenceLack of opportunitiesLack of personal
interestLack of senior colleague support/mentoringLack of time/competing
interests or commitmentsNot in research post or no allocated time in job
planWider organisational factorsOther

Lack of time, competing demands: “‘Dedicated research time has been
removed from my job plan. Clinical and managerial pressures now make
research very difficult.’‘Mainly lack of dedicated time and links with
established psychotherapy researchers.’”Lack of support and contacts:
“‘Too little time; no admin support for the scout work; no team or group
to support applications; hostile competition from psychology and
psychiatry; hopeless stereotypes about medical psychotherapy.’‘Support
and time. It requires membership of a group. I have not been able to
develop these in spite of trying to collaborate with research
psychologists.’”Lack of opportunities, wider organisational factors:
“‘Don't know who to contact/not aware of any current psychotherapy
research projects being undertaken within my trust/its associated
academic institute.’‘There simply is no psychotherapy research as far as
I know.’‘Not seen as a priority by academics, therefore not
encouraged/supported.’‘No good research going on – multicentre – in my
area of interest that is psychodynamic.’‘There just isn't a lot going on
and when I do find some to be involved in it's hard to get my name on
the paper if and when it gets published.’”Lack of potential
collaborators, lack of senior colleague support: “‘The lack of
psychotherapy research that I would be interested in in close enough
proximity to where I work.’‘Limited interest in research among
colleagues and trainers.’‘The high-flying research department I work in
regularly shunned psychotherapy research related proposals I made for
seven years.’”

.. _sec2-6:

Faculty role and activities to promote psychotherapy research
-------------------------------------------------------------

The majority of respondents (*n* = 120, 70%) were unsure whether the
Faculty of Medical Psychotherapy was adequately interested and involved
in research, 22% (*n* = 37) felt that it was not and 9% (*n* = 15) felt
that it was. However, most respondents (*n* = 137, 80%) said they would
like the Faculty to do more to promote psychotherapy research. Many
(*n* = 125, 73%) said they would be interested in participating in
Faculty activities to do with psychotherapy research. Respondents were
asked what they would like the Faculty to do; they were offered six
options, from which they could select as many as they wished (`Table
3 <#tab03>`__). The most popular option was ‘Facilitate networking among
members who are interested or involved in research’. Additional free
text responses gave further ideas: “‘Ask the College to help make links
with academics and possible sources of funding.’‘Identify research
experts.’‘Link with other established research bodies.’‘Network with
other faculties, their newsletters, identify gaps and encourage joint
working in projects.’‘Networking could extend to mentoring.’‘Pair
trainees with research-orientated psychotherapists to inculcate a
culture of research in next generation of psychotherapists.’‘The Faculty
could argue for the return of one day per week for research and the
completion of the equivalent of an MSc in research.’” Table
3Interventions the Faculty should deliver to promote psychotherapy
research (*n* = 172; multiple selections allowed)Facilitate networking
among members who are interested or involved in research132 (77%)Feature
articles related to research in the Faculty newsletter or other
communication119 (69%)Offer conferences on psychotherapy research118
(69%)Organise skills workshops or webinars on research methodology116
(67%)Compile practical tips and guidance for setting up research
projects115 (67%)Make psychotherapy research journals more accessible to
members (e.g. via RCPsych library services)104 (60%)Other12 (7%)

.. _sec2-7:

Trainees and psychotherapy research
-----------------------------------

When asked what the Faculty could do to specifically support trainees to
get involved in psychotherapy research, the most popular response (of
the four options offered), among both trainees and non-trainees, was
‘Help link up psychotherapy research supervisors to trainees’ (voted by
*n* = 148 (86%) respondents). ‘Offer small grants, or a trainee award or
prize for psychotherapy research’ and ‘Place more emphasis on research
within the psychotherapy curriculum’ were voted by *n* = 108 (63%) and
*n* = 90 (52%) respondents respectively. Again, free-text responses gave
further elaborations and ideas, such as the following.

Placing research on the training agenda: “‘There should be a better
balance of what is asked of us within the curriculum. The more we get
space and time to work with research that interests us during our core
training, the more we will be able to continue to do it in the future
and make an actual difference in research.’‘It needs to be valued as a
pursuit and encouraged as a part of the career path rather than a
defeatist and sometimes elitist attitude precluding most from pursuing
it.’”Action from trainers and organisations: “‘Encourage HEE [Health
Education England] to develop more research-oriented training
posts.’‘Have psychotherapy consultants promoting a research-oriented
practice.’”Senior-level development opportunities: “‘Develop consultants
as well as trainees.’‘It would be good to establish senior academic
positions in medical psychotherapy.’”Promoting psychotherapy research:
“‘Identify a list of research questions that psychotherapy research
would be able to answer and publish it and regularly update it so that
trainees can be inspired and if they would like to do research, may
consider choosing a topic.’‘More emphasis on psychotherapy research
across all the curricula not just the psychotherapy curriculum.’”Other
comments: “‘Not sure. Depends on the amount of time the trainee has.
Pursuing the research agenda may be important but it is not as important
as obtaining a thorough and secure grounding in clinical
psychotherapy.’”

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

.. _sec3-1:

Main findings
-------------

In this first ever survey of the membership of the Faculty of Medical
Psychotherapy on research, psychiatrists across all levels of training
and experience, working within and outside of medical psychotherapy as a
specialty, strongly endorsed the importance of knowledge of
psychotherapy research in their work. There was a high level of research
experience or qualification among the survey respondents – almost half
held a research degree, one-third had held a paid research post and 97%
had engaged in some kind of research activity.

Given the low response rate to the survey, these findings cannot be
taken as representative of the membership of the Faculty in general.
Nevertheless, the survey highlights the existence of a group of members
within the Faculty who are interested and engaged in research, and gives
an indication of how the Faculty can play a part in this area. Despite
the high prevalence of research qualifications and experience, only a
minority of respondents had current opportunities for involvement in
research, and the majority perceived obstacles to engaging in
psychotherapy research. This points to an untapped potential and
resource for psychotherapy research and begs the question of what one
can or should do with it.

.. _sec3-2:

Strengths and limitations
-------------------------

Our survey is the first of its kind for the Faculty and addresses an
important issue for training and development in medical psychotherapy.
The questions were designed to extract relevant background data, views
and experiences that can inform the Faculty's strategy. The entire
Faculty membership was surveyed and the low response rate means that the
findings cannot be regarded as representative of the Faculty membership
at large. The Faculty has a large number of quiescent members and this
is also a factor in the low response rate. To put this in context, there
were only 269 doctors with medical psychotherapy (or psychotherapy) as
their specialty listed on the General Medical Council specialist
register in 2019.\ :sup:`9` This indicates that we had 42/269 (16%) of
specialty-listed medical psychotherapists responding in this survey.
Many of these doctors may not be working in designated psychotherapy
posts or be practising psychotherapy. The number of doctors in
postgraduate training in medical psychotherapy in the UK in the same
year was 37. This indicates we had 14/37 (38%) of medical psychotherapy
trainees responding.

One expects that members who are more research-inclined were more likely
to take time to respond to the survey, thus biasing the results towards
a more pro-research direction (i.e. viewing research as more important
and having greater experience and interest in research) than would be
found across the membership in general. Likewise, the views on research
opportunities or lack thereof, and desire for more Faculty engagement
with research, cannot be generalised across the entire membership of the
Faculty. The responses may be subject to some degree of bias due to
social desirability, although the free-text responses suggested
considerable frankness of expressed views. The choice of interventions
that the Faculty could deliver to promote research and support trainees
in research were based on a pre-determined list of options and may not
have covered all possibilities.

Nevertheless, the survey highlights the presence of a group of
research-inclined members in the Faculty and points to ways that these
members can be helped to participate more actively in research. Members
are keen for the Faculty to facilitate networking. This may mitigate
against the sense of isolation and disconnection that individuals may
face among local colleagues or within organisations with little interest
in psychotherapy research. Networking can take a number of forms – for
example connecting experts and supervisors with trainees, linking with
other faculties (such as the Faculty of Academic Psychiatry), links with
established research and funding bodies. Other ideas for the Faculty to
implement include featuring articles on research more prominently in
newsletters, organising academic activities (e.g. conferences, skills
workshops) on research, offering practical guidance on setting up
projects, and better access to psychotherapy research journals (`Box
1 <#box1>`__ lists useful resources on research). Box 1Useful resources
related to researchPublications Davis WE, Giner-Sorolla R, Lindsay DS,
Lougheed JP, Makel MC, Meier ME, et al. Peer-review guidelines promoting
replicability and transparency in psychological science. *Adv Meth Pract
Psychol Sci* 2018; **1**: 556–73.Rhodes M. How to undertake a research
project and write a scientific paper. *Ann R Coll Surg Engl* 2012;
**94**, 297–9.Online guidelines Planning a good research project
(Postgrad.com): https://www.postgrad.com/uk_research_planning/\ Basic
steps in the research process (North Hennepin Community College):
https://www.nhcc.edu/student-resources/library/doinglibraryresearch/basic-steps-in-the-research-process\ Policies
and guidance for researchers (UK Research and Innovation):
https://mrc.ukri.org/research/policies-and-guidance-for-researchers/#policies\ Guidelines
for completing a research protocol for observational studies (University
College London Hospitals):
http://www.sld.cu/galerias/pdf/sitios/revsalud/guidelines_for_observational_studies.pdf

Structural and organisational issues were also highlighted in the survey
responses. The real and perceived disinterest and even hostility of
academic institutions towards psychotherapy research, sometimes combined
with negative preconceptions about medical psychotherapy, especially
psychoanalytically oriented psychotherapy, create a culture that does
not consider it possible for medical psychotherapists to engage in
research. To an extent, this is reflected in certain deficits in
research academic development opportunities for medical psychotherapy.
In England, the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Integrated
Academic Training Programme provides academic opportunities for doctors
and dentists in specialty training, through the funding of Academic
Clinical Fellowship (ACF) and Clinical Lectureship (CL) posts that
support trainees to spend 25% (in the case of ACF) or 50% (CL) of their
time in research training over 3 or 4 years. In more than a decade of
this programme, no single trainee has been awarded such a post within
the specialty of medical psychotherapy.

There are top-down as well as bottom-up problems to be addressed. The
historical lack of research-active senior medical psychotherapists and
the absence of medical psychotherapists within academic institutions
means that medical psychotherapy has become a non-existent entity in
many research circles. Some argue that research should be more embedded
in training in medical psychotherapy, in which the prevailing emphasis
is on acquiring clinical psychotherapeutic skill; they believe that
knowledge of psychotherapy research, routine use of clinical outcomes,
and experience in designing and conducting research should all form part
of the curriculum for trainees. Among medical psychotherapy trainees,
designated time that is meant for research or special interest (such
sessions exist for psychiatry trainees of all specialties) is often used
instead for further clinical experience or for personal psychotherapy.

Senior and consultant-level medical psychotherapists in the public
sector have faced increasing cuts to sessions and their job plans focus
exclusively on clinical service delivery; this approach is short-sighted
and deprives medical psychotherapy of possibilities for development. A
more beneficial strategy would be to encourage those medical
psychotherapists with research experience and interests to pursue
projects as part of their job plan, and to provide support where needed
to facilitate this. Where a National Health Service (NHS) organisation
already has an established partnership with an academic institution,
links for psychotherapy research can be set up and formally endorsed by
both organisations. Previous research has indicated that, to be willing
to participate in research, psychotherapists expected high-quality
designs, financial compensation and personal gains.\ :sup:`10` This
indicates the importance of support to therapists at both research and
career-progression levels to encourage more participation in research.

.. _sec4:

Conclusions
===========

From the survey, we conclude that there exists a group of members within
the Faculty of Medical Psychotherapy who value research and are keen to
engage in research activity, and are a resource that ought to be
harnessed. Noting the greater level of dissatisfaction with their
research involvement among trainees than among consultants, this is a
particularly important group to focus resources on. A number of actions
recommended by survey respondents are feasible and already being
planned, for example establishing research networks, linking trainees
with supervisors, conferences and workshops on research, and campaigning
for more equitable academic opportunities nationally. Given the role of
medical psychotherapists in combining a medical, psychiatric and
psychotherapeutic perspective,\ :sup:`11` it is critically important
that this unique perspective is brought to bear on the psychotherapy
research agenda.

We thank Steve Pearce (Chair of the Faculty of Medical Psychotherapy)
for advising on the survey design and Adrian James (Registrar of the
Royal College of Psychiatrists) for approving the survey.

**Marcella Fok** is a consultant psychiatrist in psychotherapy for the
Waterview Centre, a specialist personality disorder service within
Central and North West London NHS Foundation Trust, and a visiting
researcher at the Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience,
King's College London, UK. **Tennyson Lee** is clinical lead at
Deancross Personality Disorder Service, East London NHS Foundation
Trust, and co-director of the Centre for Understanding Personality
Disorder (CUSP), London, UK. Marcella Fok and Tennyson Lee are joint
Research Leads for the Faculty of Medical Psychotherapy, Royal College
of Psychiatrists, UK. **Jessica Yakeley** is current Vice-Chair and
previous Research Lead for the Faculty of Medical Psychotherapy, Royal
College of Psychiatrists, UK; she is a consultant psychiatrist in
forensic psychotherapy and Director of the Portman Clinic, and Director
of Medical Education at the Tavistock and Portman NHS Foundation Trust,
London, UK.

.. _sec-das1:

Data availability
=================

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding author, M.F., upon reasonable request.

M.F. led on study conception, survey design, data analysis and
interpretation, and preparation and revision of the manuscript. T.L. was
involved in study conception, survey design, data analysis and
interpretation, and preparation of manuscript. J.Y. was involved in
survey design, data interpretation and preparation of the manuscript.
All authors have given final approval of the version to be published.
All authors meet the ICMJE criteria for authorship.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

.. _nts5:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

Survey questions Are you a member of the Medical Psychotherapy Faculty
of the RCPsych? If not, this survey is not for you.Are you a: Consultant
with CCT in Medical Psychotherapy; Higher Trainee in Medical
Psychotherapy (or dual training including medical psychotherapy);
Consultant in other specialty (please specify); Core Trainee or Higher
Trainee in other specialty (please specify); Other (please specify)Is
your work base in the UK? UK; outside of UK. Please specify the
geographical region or areaWhat is your current post? Please enter (e.g.
consultant in eating disorders)In your current post, do you have any
sessions in medical psychotherapy? Please give details if you wishDo you
agree that knowledge of psychotherapy research is important for your
work? Strongly agree; Agree; Neither agree nor disagree; Disagree;
Strongly disagreeIn which aspect of your work would you most like more
knowledge of existent psychotherapy research?How do you gain knowledge
of psychotherapy research? (tick all that apply) Reading journals; Using
electronic resources (e.g. email alerts, saved scholar searches);
Discussion with colleagues; Attending conferences; Involvement in
psychotherapy research activity (please specify); Other (please
specify)Are you satisfied with your current level of knowledge in
psychotherapy research? Very satisfied; Somewhat satisfied; Neither
satisfied nor dissatisfied; Somewhat dissatisfied; Very dissatisfiedHave
you any formal qualifications in research? (please tick all that apply)
None; BSc, MSc, PhD or MD equivalent; Other (please specify)Have you
ever held a paid research post? Please specifyHave you ever been
involved in the following kinds of research (not necessarily
psychotherapy related)? Qualitative, Quantitative, Neither;
Observational, Experimental, Neither; Epidemiological, Outcome,
NeitherWhat research activities have you ever been involved in? (please
tick all that apply) Literature review; Study design or protocol
writing; Recruiting research participants; Delivering intervention in a
trial; Data collection, cleaning and/or analysis; Paper writing; Peer
reviewing; Other (please specify); NoneHave you ever published
non-psychotherapy research in a peer-reviewed journal?Have you ever
published psychotherapy research in a peer-reviewed journal?Currently,
do you have any opportunities for involvement in psychotherapy research?
Please specifyAre you satisfied with your current opportunities for
involvement in psychotherapy research? Very satisfied; Somewhat
satisfied; Neither satisfied nor dissatisfied; Somewhat dissatisfied;
Very dissatisfiedDo you perceive obstacles to getting more involved in
psychotherapy research? If yes, please specifyIn your opinion, is the
Medical Psychotherapy Faculty adequately interested and involved in
research? Yes; No; Unsure. Please give reason for your answerWould you
like the Medical Psychotherapy Faculty to do more to promote
psychotherapy research? Yes; No; Unsure. Please give reason for your
answer.What kinds of things should the Faculty do to promote
psychotherapy research? (please tick all that apply) [The list of
options appears in `Table 3 <#tab03>`__ of this paper]What can the
Faculty do to specifically support trainees to get involved in
psychotherapy research? (please tick all that apply) Place more emphasis
on research within the psychotherapy curriculum; Link up psychotherapy
research project supervisors to trainees; Offer small grants, or a
trainee award or prize for psychotherapy research; Other (please
specify)Are you interested in participating in Faculty activities to do
with psychotherapy research? Extremely interested; Very interested;
Somewhat interested; Not so interested; Not at all interested. Please
leave your name and email and say something about your specific
interestPlease leave any further comments you have on this subject here

.. [1]
   CCT, Certificate of Completion of Training; SAS: Specialist and
   Associate Specialist doctor; incl., including.
