============================================================================================================================
Evensong: how the medical humanities can strengthen a patient-centred approach to both physical and mental health conditions
============================================================================================================================

Corinne Rowena DignanCorrespondence to Dr Corinne Dignan
(corinne.dignan@wales.nhs.uk)
:Date: 2022-06

:Abstract:
   The medical humanities may offer an antidote to the unconscious
   depersonalisation of patients into clinical variables and diagnoses
   at the hands of physicians, cultivating a patient-centred and
   individual approach to the management of both physical and mental
   health conditions. The emphasis on the person behind the diagnosis
   helps physicians to remain motivated and compassionate in the face of
   increasing social and organisational pressures that threaten this
   human connection. As a doctor and the relative of a patient with
   dementia, I reflect on the way in which poetry has helped to
   translate my experience as a relative into improving my own practice
   as a doctor. This article includes one of the poems I wrote during my
   grandmother's illness to aid reflection on the patient perspective I
   gained during her time in hospital, and also a brief commentary
   exploring the influence this process has had on the interactions I
   now have with my patients.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
We all have our stories. Our triumphs and our failures, the people we
love, the landscapes we create and the goals we pursue; all those days,
from the greatest moment to the most mundane, come together to form the
fabric of a life.

.. _sec1:

Presenting complaint
====================

One of the great privileges of a physician is that our patients share
their stories with us, and our eyes witness the momentous: the first cry
of new life, the last sigh as old age departs it, and countless tears,
smiles and occasional bursts of anger that our involvement in these
stories inevitably brings. During my time as a doctor, however, I have
noticed that by assigning the role of patient to these individuals
within our own narrative, we often, however unconsciously, deprive them
of their individual story. They become lists of vital signs, blood
results and diagnostic difficulties, the faces of medical conditions
that leap out of textbooks into the hospital beds in front of us,
embodying the frailty and mortality that is truly such a small part of
who they really are.

.. _sec2:

Past medical history
====================

I first became sensitised to this when my grandmother's memory faded
with vascular dementia, which followed the stroke she suffered while I
was at medical school. Her story was lost to the doctors caring for her
on the ward, and the impression that they formed of the truculent and
demented old woman who obstinately refused her medication was infinitely
removed from the independent, active and astute lady of just a few weeks
earlier, the one with a roguish twinkle in her eye who loved to sing,
laughed often and always cheated at playing cards. This was compounded
by the resistance that we, as her relatives, experienced when attempting
to engage with the doctors in our new role as proponents of her story,
finding that our attempts at advocacy were rejected as an irrelevant
distraction from her medical care.

The condensation of a rich and complex individual into the black and
white of a clinical diagnosis does our patients a disservice, but it is
a phenomenon that many doctors report in their professional practice.
For my grandmother it contributed to delays in her diagnosis, a lack of
appropriate stroke rehabilitation, a void of professional support and an
inexorable decline into depression, incontinence and pressure ulcers.
The strain of increasing service demands without a correlating increase
in resources and support stands as an obvious culprit, but the influence
of compassion fatigue and the unconscious desire to protect our own
sanity and emotions when treatments fail and operations do not go to
plan cannot be ignored.

.. _sec3:

Investigations and management
=============================

Reflecting as both a physician and a relative, I realised that I too
frequently overlooked the person behind the confused and wandering
patients on my ward; I was also too ready to make assumptions about the
quality of life of octogenarians, and I recognised the previously
unacknowledged dread of the demands of relatives during visiting time
while my pager chimed and my list of daily tasks multiplied before my
eyes.

To lend some perspective, I started to organise my thoughts and
reflections on paper, and soon found that verse provided a structure and
rhythm that helped me to understand how I could progress in my own
practice and, in my own small way, help families in similar
circumstances to my own. The process of writing helped me realise the
unique opportunity we have as physicians to gain such an insight into
another person's life, and the responsibility of ensuring that we allow
patients and their loved ones to tell us a little about the most
important things in their lives. Once we understand where a patient has
come from, we are in a better position to help them navigate the
difficulties they encounter whilst in our care and to ensure that their
story can continue in a way that is most congruent with their values.
Support from other members of the multidisciplinary team is crucial in
providing this holistic care, and the engagement of therapists in
rehabilitation, psychologists in support or the chaplain in blessing
should not be underestimated.

I wrote this particular poem to give voice to a part of my grandmother's
story, highlighting the beautiful things that I remember about her and
that I hoped would provide an insight into the person she was and the
things that she loved before her illness. To me the process of writing
this poem served as a reminder to give all my patients the chance to
tell their story, to see past the observation charts and appreciate what
truly makes up their lives. Only then can we hope to treat our patients
with the compassion and understanding that we hope our own loved ones
will experience at the hands of medical professionals; by ensuring that
this process starts first with us.\ **Evensong**\ I remember the ardent
goldfinches:a charm in your camellias,cheeks sanguine as the Eucharist.A
joyful celestial choirexuding praise and gloryfor long sweet days of
Litha.All Gods and old Gods exalted in unison.I remember the last
slivers of sunlighting shrinking vestigesof the rapeseed harvest.We
waded togetheralong faded paths which ledto the field where horsesrose
as monoliths in the fading gloom.I remember the smell of hot sweet
apples;the spoon crushing vaulted pastry roof,sinking to the bubbling
nave.Skin still scored and pricklingfrom circlets of thorns,the jealous
bramblesconstraining their inky treasures.You laughed at their bite and
spleen.I remember the hoary birch branches,prising the silvery
vellumfrom the resisting trunk.Dancing and unravelling,widdershins
around the bole;sinuous snakes entwining our ankles,threatening to
topple, threatening to fall.I remember because now you cannot.A ghost
mind astray,reneging on its past.Though your smile tells methat
something flickersfar back in your mind:a fading spark, in the darkness.

**Corinne Rowena Dignan** MBChB, is a Foundation Year 2 Doctor who
qualified at Keele University Medical School in 2018, and was working at
St Cadoc's Hospital, Aneurin Bevan University Health Board, Newport, UK
at the time of writing this piece.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

.. _nts4:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. _sec4:

Supplementary material
----------------------

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2021.3.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material
