======================================================================================================
Response to: Lagunes-Cordoba et al ‘International medical graduates: how can UK psychiatry do better?’
======================================================================================================



Paul Tiffin
Lewis Paton

:date: 2022-04


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
The paper by Lagunes-Cordoba et al\ :sup:`1` makes important points in
relation to differential attainment in psychiatry. However, we note the
statement: ‘we note that technically the term “IMG” applies to a White
British citizen who studies abroad and returns to work in the UK, yet
such an individual is less likely to face attainment gaps’. This may not
be entirely true, depending on what one means by ‘attainment’ in this
context. We previously published a study using data drawn from the UK
Medical Education Database (UKMED), which investigated educational
performance and success at recruitment into specialty training for UK
International Medical Graduates (IMGs). These are doctors who are UK
citizens but have obtained their primary medical qualification outside
the UK. We showed that, on average, ratings at the Annual Review of
Competence Progression were poorer for UK IMGs than non-UK IMGs.
Nevertheless, UK IMGs were more likely to be successful, compared with
IMGs, when applying for a specialty training post.\ :sup:`2` This
finding obviously raises issues of fairness, and effectiveness, in
postgraduate medical selection. We would also wish to draw attention to
our own recently published study of differential attainment in the
MRCPsych examination, which was not cited in the paper, though highly
relevant.\ :sup:`3` This demonstrated that differential pass rates at
the Clinical Assessment of Skills and Competencies existed for
candidates (both UK graduates and IMGs) who identified as being from
minority ethnic groups, even after controlling for the influence of
performance on knowledge-based components of the examination. Similar
findings were previously reported by Esmail, for the Clinical Skills
Assessment component of the MRCGP.\ :sup:`4` At the time we suggested
that these differential pass rates were likely to have complex
underlying causes but urgently required investigating and addressing.
Understanding and addressing differential attainment is clearly a matter
of social justice but is also essential to the well-being of the
National Health Service, its patients and the overseas-qualified staff
it has traditionally relied on. Therefore, we felt it was important to
draw attention to our own findings, which we believe have contributed to
understanding this important but sensitive area of workforce research.
