=======================================================================
Veganism and eating disorders: assessment and management considerations
=======================================================================

:Author: Sarah J. Fuller
:Author: Andrea Brown
:Author: Jeanette Rowley
:Author: Jade Elliott-ArcherCorrespondence to Sarah Fuller
         (sarah.fuller@nhs.net)
:Date: 2022-04
:Abstract:
   The number of people following a vegan diet in the UK is increasing.
   Eating disorder clinicians are anecdotally reporting that more of
   their patients with anorexia nervosa are wanting to follow a vegan
   diet. The relationship between veganism and eating disorders is
   unclear. A fictitious scenario is used to explore these issues. An
   approach is described that clinicians may follow to help patients to
   understand the potential relationship between their eating disorder
   and veganism. The human rights issues this involves are also
   explored. It is hoped that this article will make readers more aware
   of this complex issue and the impact it can have on engagement with
   services and on treatment options.


pmc
.. _sec1:

Clinical scenario
=================

You are a trainee in a tier 4 specialist eating disorders unit (SEDU)
and a 22-year-old female has been admitted under section 3 of the Mental
Health Act 1983 (MHA) with a body mass index (BMI) of
12.7 kg/m\ :sup:`2`, having lost 7 kg in 5 weeks. She has had
amenorrhoea for 2 years. She was diagnosed with anorexia nervosa at age
17, requiring a 6-month admission, also under section 3 of the MHA, to a
general tier 4 child and adolescent mental health unit. Since age 18,
she has followed a strict vegan diet, whereas her family do not. She
says her reasons for adopting this are ethical: a concern for the
environment and animal welfare. Her family have questioned this, citing
the timing of her illness and some lifestyle choices that conflict with
veganism, such as using cosmetics containing animal products.

The SEDU has been unable to provide a full vegan diet. As a result, she
is refusing to eat. For the past 72 h she has retired to bed and is only
drinking water. At present, her physical health observations are stable.
In the morning handover, the nursing staff request a professionals’
meeting following the unit's policy regarding refusal to eat.

Questions to consider: What is the relationship between veganism and
eating disorders?How can clinicians assess this?What are the patient's
rights with regard to dietary choice on the in-patient unit?What are the
nutritional considerations of a vegan diet?What are the implications for
refeeding patients who are vegan?

.. _sec2:

Discussion
==========

.. _sec2-1:

The complex relationship between veganism and restrictive eating disorders
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Vegan Society defines veganism as: “‘A philosophy and way of living
which seeks to exclude – as far as is possible and practicable – all
forms of exploitation of, and cruelty to, animals for food, clothing or
any other purpose; and by extension, promotes the development and use of
animal-free alternatives for the benefit of animals, humans and the
environment. In dietary terms it denotes the practice of dispensing with
all products derived wholly or partly from animals.’\ :sup:`1`”Compared
with vegetarianism, veganism requires extensive dietary and lifestyle
restrictions to avoid any product derived from animals.

Clinicians who support patients with restrictive eating disorders such
as anorexia nervosa will be aware of the number of ways that patients
can restrict their diet, ranging from total caloric restriction and
self-diagnosed dietary allergies/intolerances to socially acceptable
dietary restrictions such as vegetarianism or veganism. The link between
vegetarianism and the development of eating disorders is well
established in the literature.\ :sup:`2–6` These researchers suggest
that some individuals with restrictive eating disorders adopt a
vegetarian diet to limit the available dietary choices or to justify a
choice that is lower in calories. However, this apparent link may be due
to methodological problems encountered in some of these studies. For
example, eating disorder screening tools would not be able to
differentiate between dietary restraint from being vegetarian or
restraint driven by an eating disorder.\ :sup:`7,8`

For decades, diets have claimed to assist weight loss by advocating
different forms of restriction. It is known that following diets can be
the trigger to developing eating disorders in vulnerable
individuals.\ :sup:`9` A recent example of a popular diet is the ‘clean
eating movement’, which advocates eating freshly prepared, unprocessed
foods and recommends eating more plant-based foods. This movement is
highly active on social media, with prominent influencers advocating
diets, often with no qualifications to do so. If taken to an extreme,
this can lead to ‘orthorexia’ . Orthorexia describes a presentation in
which the person becomes pathologically obsessed with eating healthy
food.\ :sup:`10,11` The term, coined by American physician Steven
Bratman, does not appear in any of the classifications used in
psychiatry but is used in practice to describe this presentation. For
some patients, the overlap between healthy eating, dieting, clean
eating, orthorexia and veganism is blurred.\ :sup:`12`

In the past 10 years, the number of people following a vegan diet in the
UK has increased and veganism is particularly common in younger age
groups,\ :sup:`13` females\ :sup:`14` and those living in urban
areas.\ :sup:`15` It is estimated that ~1% of the UK population now
follow a vegan diet.\ :sup:`16` Clinicians may be worried that veganism
shares aspects in common with restrictive eating disorders, controlled
dietary exclusion and checking of food labels. Some researchers have
suggested that the theoretical link between dietary restriction seen in
eating disorders is mirrored in veganism.\ :sup:`17,18` Furthermore, the
individuals who are more likely to adopt a vegan diet have demographic
overlap with those at risk of developing an eating disorder.

At present there is a lack of research into veganism in individuals who
have restrictive eating disorders. Some studies have shown that those
following a vegan diet are at lower risk of developing pathological
eating disorders,\ :sup:`19` whereas others have highlighted that former
adolescent vegans may be at increased risk of extreme ‘unhealthful’
weight-control behaviours.\ :sup:`20` However, adolescence is a period
in which an individual starts to become independent of their family,
become more socially conscious and develop their self-identity. Many
young people adopt dietary patterns that are different from their
families’ and therefore clinicians need to be aware of the distinction
between healthy curiosity or lifestyle choices and eating-disordered
behaviours.

We conducted a flash survey, via SurveyMonkey, on 1 March 2018 to
identify how many patients receiving either specialist eating disorder
unit (SEDU) treatment or day hospital treatment identified as vegan on
admission. In total, 65 specialist services responded, representing 1008
patients with eating disorders. Within adult services, rates of veganism
were reported as 46/419 (11%) in the SEDUs and 11/173 (6.4%) in the day
hospitals. In child and adolescent services, the rates were 37/230 (16%)
in the SEDUs and 15/186 (8.1%) in the day hospitals. These rates are
higher than the national reported prevalence\ :sup:`16` of 1% and this
initial finding suggests that more research is needed to identify the
actual prevalence within SEDUs.

.. _sec2-2:

Approach to assessing vegan diets in people with eating disorders
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Clinicians should be mindful of two key questions when trying to
distinguish whether an individual is following a vegan diet for ethical
reasons or not. First, are ethical choices seen in non-food aspects of
life, such as clothes, toiletries and use of free time? Second, is there
a pattern of increasing dietary restriction, such as starting off with
healthy eating, then vegetarianism and finally veganism, or were ethical
concerns present before the dietary restriction began?

.. _sec2-3:

What are the patient's legal rights regarding dietary choice within SEDUs?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

When balancing medical decision-making with human and equality rights,
clinicians should be aware that veganism is classed as a non-religious
belief protected under Article 9 of the European Convention on Human
Rights (the right to freedom of thought, conscience and
religion).\ :sup:`21` Case law and guidance\ :sup:`22,23` indicates that
for a belief to engage Article 9 it must: be sincerely heldbe a belief
and not an opinion/viewpointconcern a weighty and substantial aspect of
human life and behaviourattain a certain level of cogency, seriousness,
cohesion and importancebe worthy of respect in a democracy, compatible
with human dignity and must not conflict with the rights of others.These
criteria can be referred to when trying to understand whether a
patient's vegan beliefs are distinct from their eating disorder. It is
worth noting that the beliefs of an individual cannot be decided or
overridden by others, and only a court can decide whether the belief
complies with the criteria.

The Human Rights Act 1998 (section 6) stipulates that a public body must
not act in a way that is incompatible with a Convention right. In
practice this means that patients have a right to their beliefs being
respected by the organisation providing care. Providing vegan food for
patients who request it would therefore ensure compliance with this
obligation. However, there are defences to allegations under section 6,
including, for example, vegan food not being in the best interests of
the patient and whether the patient is deemed to lack capacity to make
important healthcare decisions.

There are two forms of discrimination, direct and indirect. Direct
discrimination occurs where, contrary to section 13 of the Equality Act
2010, certain groups/people are treated differently because they hold a
particular philosophical belief. Indirect discrimination can take place
where, contrary to section 19 of the Act, there is an apparently neutral
policy that applies to all but has the effect of disadvantaging certain
groups/people (e.g. those expressing their philosophical belief in
veganism). This means that if a SEDU has an inflexible catering regimen
that does not allow for veganism, it leaves the unit open to legal
action stating indirect discrimination. In claims arising, an objective
justification for the inflexible regime will be required. Clinicians do
have a potential defence to individual claims of indirect discrimination
if life-saving treatments are required, for example nasogastric tube
feeding, given that there is no appropriate vegan enteral feed available
at present.

.. _sec2-4:

What nutritional considerations need to be taken into account in vegan diets?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

With appropriate expertise and planning, there no is reason why a vegan
diet should not be well balanced and sufficient to meet the nutritional
needs of any individual. Vegans need to ensure that they eat a wide
variety of foods and find suitable plant-based alternatives for meat and
dairy products. However, research suggests that there are specific
nutritional vulnerabilities within a vegan diet that require particular
attention or supplementation,\ :sup:`24` This has led some European
countries to suggest that vegans have blood tests every 3 months to
monitor their nutritional status.\ :sup:`25` Current guidance in the UK
(https://www.nhs.uk/live-well/eat-well/vegetarian-and-vegan-diets-q-and-a/)
is for vegans to take an appropriate vitamin and mineral supplement to
ensure that their nutritional needs are met.

The key nutrients of concern are vitamin B\ :sub:`12`, vitamin D,
iodine, selenium and omega-3 fats.\ :sup:`24` People who have a
restrictive eating disorder may not be able to eat a sufficient quantity
and variety of foods and consequently they may become deficient in these
and other nutrients. Close monitoring of patients’ biochemistry is
therefore advised to identify whether they are deficient in any
nutrients.

.. _sec2-5:

What are the implications for refeeding patients who are vegan?
---------------------------------------------------------------

It is possible to refeed a patient on a vegan diet. Following a vegan
diet is not an identified risk factor for the development of refeeding
syndrome. However, it is important to be aware that, in some cases,
like-for-like adaptations to catering menus may result in a vegan
patient having to eat a larger volume of food. This may result in
psychological distress as they compare their portions with those of
their non-vegan peers. It may also be problematic for patients
experiencing delayed gastric emptying that results in uncomfortable
bloating and pain.\ :sup:`26,27`

Clinicians should also be aware that, if treatment is required for
micronutrient deficiency (such as calcium, phosphate or magnesium) due
to refeeding syndrome, some vegan alternatives may not have the
equivalent nutritional value or bioavailability.\ :sup:`28,29` It is
well worth having discussions with the local pharmacy to ensure that
supplies of such micronutrients are available and their characteristics
are summarised for use in out-of-hours and other urgent situations.
However, in life-threatening emergencies, treatment should be
given.\ :sup:`30`

There is currently only one prescribable supplement drink registered as
vegan friendly in the UK (AYMES ActaSolve Smoothie®), but this is not
nutritionally complete and it also not suitable for enteral
feeding.\ :sup:`31` However, if nasogastric tube feeding is required,
given the absence of any vegan enteral feeds, clinicians should be aware
that many vegans will often accept foods that contain minimal amounts of
animal products, for example a soya-based enteral feed in which the only
ingredient that is not vegan may be a vitamin such as vitamin D. In
cases where a person refuses to accept this option, and they are deemed
not to have the capacity to make such a decision, legal advice should be
sought for clarification and support.

.. _sec3:

Reflections and considerations on the clinical scenario
=======================================================

In the clinical scenario introducing this article the patient is at high
risk of refeeding syndrome and is likely to be cognitively impaired
owing to starvation. There is still an option to work with her to
re-establish regular eating on a fully vegan diet, which would be the
least restrictive option under the MHA. Irrespective of whether the
veganism is independent of her eating disorder or not, facilitating a
vegan diet in line with her beliefs will result in her feeling
understood and will allow the therapeutic relationship to be repaired.
Any discussions about the relationship between veganism and her eating
disorder can take place when she is no longer at medical risk and is
able to engage cognitively.

This scenario does pose the question: do patients with eating disorders
have the right to follow a vegan diet while admitted to a SEDU? Indeed,
our flash survey highlighted that not all units are able to provide a
vegan diet – 15/21 adult SEDUs (71.4%) and 10/13 child and adolescent
SEDUs (76.9%) that responded could not – i.e. the option of following a
vegan diet while receiving tier 4 treatment is not yet universal.
However, the survey did not enquire into the difference between vegan
diets being available versus vegan diets being offered in practice.

Veganism is becoming much more common and it is defined as a protected
characteristic under the Equality Act 2010. Therefore, SEDUs need find
ways to adapt to meeting vegan beliefs just as religious beliefs are
accommodated. It is unlikely that a SEDU would expect a person of Jewish
faith to eat pork, for example. Provision of a complete vegan diet plan
incorporating all the nutrients required to avoid refeeding syndrome and
promote healthy weight restoration is possible but requires the input of
a specialist dietitian.

The British Dietetic Association's Mental Health Specialist Group has
endorsed an internal document to help dietitians understand whether the
decision to follow a vegan diet is likely to be linked to an eating
disorder or is a genuine lifestyle choice that pre-existed someone's
illness (this document is not yet available outside of the BDA). In some
instances, veganism can help a person recovering from an eating
disorder, allowing them to discover new foods and ways of cooking,
change the way they perceive food and embrace the vegan subculture. For
others it may be an opportunity to restrict their diet and maintain
their eating disorder.

.. _sec3-1:

Practical management
--------------------

In the short and medium term, i.e. during this patient's admission, her
veganism can be respected but also challenged in a therapeutic way, as
it is not clear that her decision to follow a vegan diet is not linked
to her illness. It is important to remember that being malnourished is
associated with poor cognitive flexibility, so it might be more
appropriate to address this once appropriate and regular nutrition is
well established. At that stage, working with the unit's dietitian, it
can be challenged with modifications to her meal plan and social tasks
involving eating outside of the unit with family and friends. The aim
would be to expand the variety of her diet while maintaining a weight at
which her body is functioning and no longer experiencing any symptoms of
poor nutrition and to challenge aspects of her veganism that may have
been hijacked by her anorexia nervosa. In the long term, her community
eating disorder team can continue to work with her and her dietary
choices as is usual practice.

Treating someone with anorexia nervosa requires that the person's
religion or belief is respected while at the same time ensuring that the
person is not discriminated against in terms of the quality of treatment
they receive. This can produce a quandary owing to the lack of vegan sip
feeds and enteral feeds, which may be required under certain
circumstances. In life-saving situations some patients may be prepared
to accept non-vegan treatment options. In the meantime, pharmaceutical
companies are being encouraged to produce vegan alternatives.

Certain situations, such as treatment under the MHA, which could include
compulsory nasogastric feeding or treatment with non-vegan medication,
produce ethical dilemmas. On the one hand, the therapeutic relationship
with the patient is already under strain; on the other hand, treatment
could be life-saving. At present, and in the absence of equivalent vegan
enteral feeds and medicines, the best that can be done is to treat the
patient as you would any other, while being as collaborative as possible
and minimising the use of non-vegan options.

In March 2019, a consensus statement was published outlining guidance
for practitioners in the UK treating vegan patients with eating
disorders.\ :sup:`30` This will help services to provide appropriate
treatment for these individuals.

.. _sec3-2:

The real people involved
------------------------

The fictitious case scenario is based on the reflections of a real
patient and a carer. We obtained informed consent from both to create
the scenario and to publish their anonymised reflections here.

.. _sec3-2-1:

A patient's reflection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

“‘My veganism has always been respected in 20 years of [NHS and private]
treatment, and even when tube feeding/supplements were required I had a
product that was soya based and only had one element that was derived
from animals. Wherever possible, my medication also was free from animal
ingredients. My diet was limited and often “safer”, but I wanted the
opportunity to challenge myself with foods I could enjoy socially within
the restrictions of my illness. After 5 years in the community, I had an
admission where I felt that I was detained in part due to the unit's
anti-vegan policy. I gave up. Not being listened to led to a standstill
in my treatment – it was “them versus me”. Veganism was the only thing
stronger than my illness: I would drink a litre of oil over a teaspoon
of cow's milk. I needed tube feeding and the idea of a cow's milk-based
feed was difficult to accept. My body felt like a graveyard. My mental
health, identity and soul were damaged and instead of fighting anorexia
I was fighting the system.’”

.. _sec3-2-2:

A carer's reflection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

“‘I am 100% convinced that my daughter's request to follow a vegan diet
was driven by her illness. Through her whole life I had ensured that the
family had a healthy and balanced diet which included treats and party
food. In our house, no food was a “bad” food. Prior to being diagnosed
with anorexia, she first announced that she wanted to cut out meat, then
fish, then eggs. Within three months she wanted to become vegan. We
embraced family treatment and had many tantrums along the way regarding
her veganism. We are now in a good place and she has admitted, guiltily,
that she never wanted to be vegan and her illness drove her to pursue
this as a way of restricting.’”

We would like to thank both the patient and the carer, who are not
related, for their contribution to this paper. Both have asked to remain
anonymous.

.. _sec4:

Conclusions
===========

We have highlighted the increasing incidence of veganism at a national
level and the flash survey has suggested increased incidence within the
eating disorders population. Concerns about animal welfare,
environmental considerations and health impacts appear to be driving
this change. There has been little research into veganism and eating
disorders and more research is needed. A fictitious case has been used
to explore the approach clinicians can take to support a vegan patient
with an eating disorder. This included considerations on the
relationship between the eating disorder and veganism, refeeding on a
vegan diet and the legal implications for patients on a SEDU. The
anonymous perspective of a patient and a carer highlight the
multifaceted issues inherent in recovery from an eating disorder and the
nuanced role veganism can plan. Wherever possible, treatments for people
with eating disorders should be person centred and therefore this is an
opportunity to adapt meal plans, offer appropriate supplements and
engage vegan patients in their treatment.

**Sarah J. Fuller** is an advanced specialist eating disorders dietitian
with East London NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Andrea Brown** is a
consultant psychiatrist and psychotherapist in eating disorders with
Schoen Clinic York, UK. **Jeanette Rowley** is a legal advisor and Chair
of the Vegan Society's International Rights Network, Birmingham, UK.
**Jade Elliott-Archer** is a solicitor in the Medical Negligence team of
Irwin Mitchell LLP, Birmingham, UK.

.. _sec-das1:

Data availability
=================

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding author, S.J.F., upon reasonable request.

S.J.F. and A.B. undertook the reviews of the literature, drafted the
paper and analysed the data. J.R. and J.E.-A. provided the legal
contributions.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

.. _nts5:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.
