====================================================================================================
Characteristics of global retractions of schizophrenia-related publications: A bibliometric analysis
====================================================================================================

Pan Chen
Xiao-Hong Li
Zhaohui Su
Yi-Lang Tang
Yi Ma
Chee H. Ng
Yu-Tao Xiang [1]_ [2]_\*Correspondence: Yu-Tao Xiang,
xyutly@gmail.com\ Chee H. Ng, cng@unimelb.edu.au\  [3]_ [4]_
:Date: 2022-8-01

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Objectives

   The growing rate of retraction of scientific publications has
   attracted much attention within the academic community, but there is
   little knowledge about the nature of such retractions in
   schizophrenia-related research. This study aimed to analyze the
   characteristics of retractions of schizophrenia-related publications.

   .. rubric:: Materials and methods

   The Web of Science was searched for eligible studies. A bibliometric
   analysis was conducted to describe the characteristics of the
   retractions using R software and Excel 2019. Content analysis was
   conducted to examine the essential components of retraction notices.

   .. rubric:: Results

   A total of 36 retracted publications with 415 citations were
   identified from 1997 to 2021, of which, 83.3% occurred in the last
   decade. The overall retraction rate was 0.19%, with most of them (29;
   80.56%) from the United Kingdom. The retractions were published in 33
   journals, and the 2020 IFs ranged between 0.17 and 49.96 (Median =
   3.93). The retractions involved 21 research areas, particularly in
   Psychiatry (19; 52.78%), Neurosciences and Neurology (10; 27.78%),
   and Psychology (7; 19.44%). Data issues (17; 42.22%), administrative
   errors of the publishers (5; 13.89%), and study design (4; 11.11%)
   were the top three reasons for retractions.

   .. rubric:: Conclusion

   This study provides an insight into retractions of
   schizophrenia-related publications. Institutional governance should
   be further strengthened to improve the scrutiny of publications,
   prevent continuing citations, and erroneous propagation after
   retraction.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
.. _S1:

Introduction
============

Retraction of peer-reviewed scientific publications is becoming more
common. The growing rate of retractions with the increasing scientific
publications in recent years has attracted much attention. Numerous
reasons for retractions include concerns about data quality, and
research misconduct, such as redundant publication, plagiarism,
copyright infringement, unethical research, and peer review manipulation
((n.d.a)). The main objectives of retraction are to ensure research
integrity rather than to punish authors, and to alert the academic
community that these publications’ findings are not credible and should
not be cited ((n.d.b), (n.d.c)). In the process of creating innovations,
research outputs play a vital role as an important medium for
information communication and presentation of findings. The filtering of
these publications deserves attention, as the risk of disseminating
inaccurate information and results of poor-quality research increases
with the rapid expansion of ongoing research ((n.d.d)). For instance, to
date, 196 articles related to COVID-19 have been retracted due to
various reasons ((n.d.e)). If research articles are fraudulent, they
could lead to catastrophic consequences on human health. In 1998, Dr.
Andrew Wakefield and his colleagues unethically conducted research on
children and concluded that there was a link between measles, mumps,
rubella (MMR) vaccine and autism; consequently, thousands of parents
refused MMR vaccines for their children which caused an outbreak of
fatal measles ((n.d.f)). This misinformation continued to spread for at
least 12 years, which had an immeasurable health impact on families with
children with autism and also resulted in a huge financial cost to
verify the accuracy of this finding ((n.d.f)). Another paper that was
retracted from The Lancet due to doubtful data authenticity ((n.d.g)),
claimed that hydroxychloroquine was ineffective in treating COVID-19 and
even caused arrhythmias, which provoked a strong reaction in the
scientific community and the public ((n.d.h)).

The retraction rate of scientific publications across many fields has
been increasing in recent years. One study found a retraction rate of
0.38 per 10,000 publications in all fields in 1985, 2.03 in 2000, and
5.95 in 2014 ((n.d.i)), while another study found an average rate of 2.5
per 10,000 between 2013 and 2016 in all fields ((n.d.j)). A recent
report found that the retraction rate has increased 10 times in
veterinary medicine and animal health publications during the period
between 1993 and 2019 ((n.d.k)). The trends of retractions varied by
publication year ((n.d.i)) and research field ((n.d.l), (n.d.m)). The
most common reason for retraction is academic misconduct, such as fraud
or suspected fraud, duplicate publications, and plagiarism ((n.d.m),
(n.d.n)).

Previous studies have reviewed the retracted literature in different
specialties of medical fields, such as nursing and midwifery ((n.d.o)),
neurosurgery ((n.d.p)), hematology ((n.d.m)), and anesthesiology
((n.d.a)). However, few studies have focused on the mental health
literature ((n.d.q)). Schizophrenia is a severe mental disorder
characterized by disturbances in perceived reality and behavior, such as
persistent delusions, hallucinations, disorganized thinking, negative
symptoms, and cognitive impairment ((n.d.r)–(n.d.s)). Approximately 1 in
300 people are affected worldwide, and its global disease burden has
increased 11.4% from 1990 to 2019 ((n.d.t), (n.d.u)). Beyond the disease
itself, relevant stigma and violations of human rights associated with
schizophrenia can have a significant impact on the individual’s family,
work, and social function ((n.d.v)–(n.d.w)). Additionally, schizophrenia
patients have a shorter life expectancy when compared to the general
population ((n.d.r)). Due to these features, schizophrenia is one of the
most important areas of research in psychiatry and medicine.

A bibliometric analysis showed that the research on schizophrenia has
been increasing in recent years, involving a wide range of research
areas, including Psychiatry (69.8%), Neurosciences (20.7%), Clinical
Neurology (12.4%), Pharmacology and Pharmacy (9.6%), and
Genetics/Heredity (3.4%) ((n.d.x)). Schizophrenia related research has
mainly focused on epidemiology, etiology, and treatment aspects, but the
findings remained variable and at times controversial ((n.d.r)).
Ensuring academic rigor is important for the medical advancement in
schizophrenia and other fields of medicine. False research results could
mislead the academic community or drive researchers in wrong directions,
leading to much wasted research resources and negative impact on patient
care and recovery ((n.d.y), (n.d.z)). Timely retraction is an important
measure to prevent erroneous findings from being propagated. However,
the nature of retractions in schizophrenia-related publications is
unknown.

Bibliometric analysis has been widely used to examine the research
trends in a specific field. Compared with traditional descriptive
reviews of the literature, it is based on two components: one is the
performance analysis that can provide the general characteristics of
relevant publications, such as the number of publications, publication
years, authors, institutions, countries, and journals; the other is
science mapping, which examines and visualizes the relationships between
research constituents such as co-citation analysis, bibliographic
coupling, co-word and co-authorship analyses. In recent years,
bibliometric analysis has been used to explore the characteristics of
retractions in academic fields such as rehabilitation ((n.d.aa)) and
oncology ((n.d.l)). However, to the best of our knowledge, no
bibliometric analysis on schizophrenia-related publication retractions
has been published. As such, we performed a bibliometric analysis and
content analysis of the characteristics of retracted publications on
this topic, including publication years, sources, research areas,
citations, and reasons for retractions.

.. _S2:

Materials and methods
=====================

The retracted publications on schizophrenia-related studies were
searched from the Web of Science Core Collection in the database of the
Web of Science (WoS). The search term was “TI/AB = *Schizophrenia OR
Schizophrenias OR Schizoaffective OR Schizophreniform OR Psychosis OR
Psychotic OR Schizophrenic Disorders OR Disorder, Schizophrenic OR
Disorders, Schizophrenic OR Schizophrenic Disorder OR Schizophrenic
Disorders OR Dementia Praecox OR Schizoaffective disorder OR Psychotic
Disorders*.” The article type was limited into “\ *Retracted
Publications and Retractions*.” A comprehensive screening procedure was
conducted manually to avoid false positive or negative results.

The R software and Excel 2019 were used to summarize the characteristics
of retractions, including the published year, countries, journals, and
research areas. The Journal Impact Factor (IF) in 2020 was used for
impact analysis of the journals. Given the rapid growth of journal
impact factors, a 5-year IF was used to describe the impact of journals,
as it is more stable compared to Immediacy IF. Furthermore, an IF
without journal self-citation was used to reduce the potential inflation
of IF because self-citation of journals could result in a higher IF
value ((n.d.ab)). In addition, content analysis was used to examine the
reasons for retraction by reviewing the retraction notices. To analyze
the transparency of retraction notices, this study included the
following four essential components as previously recommended ((n.d.c)):
initiators, cause, whether there was consensus between editors and
authors on the retraction decisions, and whether retractions were
related to the post-publication review (such as comments on PubPeer).

.. _S3:

Results
=======

A total of 19,176 publications on schizophrenia-related publications
were searched in WoS from its inception to the search date (20/03/2022).
Forty retractions were found after limiting the study types, four
articles were discarded due to irrelevant topics or duplications in the
process of data cleaning. Thirty-six publications from 1997 to 2021 were
finally included in this study; of all the retractions, 83.3% (*N* = 30)
occurred in the last decade. The overall retraction rate was 0.19%, and
the years of retraction were between 2002 and 2021. The distribution of
publication year, retraction year and annual citations are presented in
`Figure 1 <#F1>`__. The delay between publication and retraction time
(year) ranged from 0 to 10 years with an average of 1.89 years (standard
deviation = 2.22 years). The total citations of the 36 retracted
publications were 415, with the most citations arising from a single
publication (151) ((n.d.ac)). The citations of the 36 retractions during
the recent ten years accounted for 49.9% (207) of the total citations.
`Figure 2 <#F2>`__ presents the distribution of research areas of the
retracted publications. The top three included Psychiatry (19, 52.78%),
Neurosciences and Neurology (10, 27.78%), and Psychology (7, 19.44%).

.. figure:: fpsyt-13-937330-g001
   :alt: Distribution of retracted publications on schizophrenia-related
   studies during 1997 and 2021.
   :name: F1

   Distribution of retracted publications on schizophrenia-related
   studies during 1997 and 2021.

.. figure:: fpsyt-13-937330-g002
   :alt: Research areas of retracted publications on
   schizophrenia-related studies.
   :name: F2

   Research areas of retracted publications on schizophrenia-related
   studies.

The retracted publications were from 15 countries or regions. `Table
1 <#T1>`__ shows the top five countries where the publications
originated, including the United Kingdom (29; 80.56%), the United States
(8; 22.22%), China (8; 22.22%), Canada (7; 19.44%), and Germany (7;
19.44%). `Table 2 <#T2>`__ shows that the 36 retractions were published
in 33 different journals. The IFs of the journals (in 2020) ranged
between 0.17 and 49.96, with a median of 3.93. The Journal of
Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics (*IF* = 2.22), Journal of ECT
(*IF* = 3.63), and Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences (*IF* = 5.12)
each retracted two publications, respectively. A total of 17 journals
(47.2%) were related to Psychology and Psychiatry.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T1

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Countries/regions with retractions of schizophrenia-related
      studies.

   ================== === =================
   Region             *N* %\ `a <#t1fna>`__
   ================== === =================
   The United Kingdom 29  80.56
   The United States  8   22.22
   China              8   22.22
   Canada             7   19.44
   Germany            7   19.44
   Portugal           5   13.89
   Spain              5   13.89
   Iran               3   8.33
   Japan              3   8.33
   Sweden             3   8.33
   India              2   5.56
   Ireland            2   5.56
   Armenia            1   2.78
   Netherlands        1   2.78
   Switzerland        1   2.78
   ================== === =================

   N, number.

   :sup:`a`\ Some publications involved more than one country;
   therefore, the total percentages were more than 100%.

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T2

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Journals with retracted publications on schizophrenia-related
      studies.

   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | Journal        | *N* | IF (2020) | IF (5 years) | IF without     |
   |                |     |           |              | self-citations |
   +================+=====+===========+==============+================+
   | Psychiatry and | 2   | 5.19      | 4.80         | 4.92           |
   | Clinical       |     |           |              |                |
   | Neurosciences  |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | Journal of ECT | 2   | 3.64      | 3.01         | 3.29           |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | Journal of     | 2   | 2.23      | 3.23         | 2.14           |
   | Developmental  |     |           |              |                |
   | and Behavioral |     |           |              |                |
   | Pediatrics     |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | Nature         | 1   | 49.96     | 54.64        | 49.32          |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | American       | 1   | 18.11     | 17.83        | 17.53          |
   | Journal of     |     |           |              |                |
   | Psychiatry     |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | National       | 1   | 17.28     | 17.58        | 16.65          |
   | Science Review |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | American       | 1   | 10.86     | 12.59        | 10.43          |
   | Journal of     |     |           |              |                |
   | Ga             |     |           |              |                |
   | stroenterology |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | British        | 1   | 9.31      | 10.24        | 9.10           |
   | Journal of     |     |           |              |                |
   | Psychiatry     |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | Schizophrenia  | 1   | 9.30      | 9.438        | 8.719          |
   | Bulletin       |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | Alzheimer’s    | 1   | 6.98      | 8.08         | 6.65           |
   | Research &     |     |           |              |                |
   | Therapy        |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | Translational  | 1   | 6.22      | 7.097        | 5.995          |
   | Psychiatry     |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | Biological     | 1   | 6.20      | 4.55         | –              |
   | Psychi         |     |           |              |                |
   | atry-Cognitive |     |           |              |                |
   | Neuroscience   |     |           |              |                |
   | and            |     |           |              |                |
   | Neuroimaging   |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | International  | 1   | 5.18      | 5.17         | 5.03           |
   | Journal of     |     |           |              |                |
   | Neuropsyc      |     |           |              |                |
   | hopharmacology |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | Journal of     | 1   | 4.79      | 5.38         | 4.69           |
   | Psychiatric    |     |           |              |                |
   | Research       |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | Journal of     | 1   | 4.38      | 5.40         | 4.15           |
   | Clinical       |     |           |              |                |
   | Psychiatry     |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | Scientific     | 1   | 4.38      | 5.13         | 4.17           |
   | Reports        |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | Journal of     | 1   | 4.36      | 4.49         | 3.97           |
   | Eth            |     |           |              |                |
   | nopharmacology |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | British        | 1   | 4.13      | 4.33         | 3.93           |
   | Journal of     |     |           |              |                |
   | Clinical       |     |           |              |                |
   | Psychology     |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | Annals of      | 1   | 3.93      | 4.63         | 3.47           |
   | Translational  |     |           |              |                |
   | Medicine       |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | Clinical       | 1   | 3.71      | 4.57         | 3.24           |
   | N              |     |           |              |                |
   | europhysiology |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | Psychiatry     | 1   | 3.22      | 3.405        | 3.123          |
   | Research       |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | BJPsych Open   | 1   | 3.20      | 3.45         | 3.04           |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | European       | 1   | 2.95      | 3.27         | 2.81           |
   | Journal of     |     |           |              |                |
   | Clinical       |     |           |              |                |
   | Pharmacology   |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | Ne             | 1   | 2.57      | 3.20         | 2.49           |
   | uropsychiatric |     |           |              |                |
   | Disease and    |     |           |              |                |
   | Treatment      |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | International  | 1   | 2.50      | 2.726        | 2.404          |
   | Journal of     |     |           |              |                |
   | Clinical       |     |           |              |                |
   | Practice       |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | Neur           | 1   | 2.33      | 2.30         | 2.31           |
   | opsychobiology |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | New Genetics   | 1   | 2.18      | 2.26         | 1.57           |
   | and Society    |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | General        | 1   | 2.00      | –            | –              |
   | Psychiatry     |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | Human          | 1   | 1.67      | 2.81         | 1.61           |
   | Psychopharmac  |     |           |              |                |
   | ology-Clinical |     |           |              |                |
   | and            |     |           |              |                |
   | Experimental   |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | Language and   | 1   | 1.50      | 1.68         | 1.41           |
   | Speech         |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | Clinical       | 1   | 1.35      | 1.65         | 0.90           |
   | Linguistics &  |     |           |              |                |
   | Phonetics      |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | Actas          | 1   | 1.20      | 2.07         | 1.13           |
   | Espanolas De   |     |           |              |                |
   | Psiquiatria    |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+
   | Sante Mentale  | 1   | 0.17      | 0.24         | –              |
   | Au Quebec      |     |           |              |                |
   +----------------+-----+-----------+--------------+----------------+

   IF, impact factor; “–”, not reported in Web of Science.

`Supplementary Table 1 <#TS1>`__ shows the characteristics of the
retractions. All the 36 retraction notices reported the reasons for the
retraction. In sum, nine (25.0%) retraction notices did not report who
were the initiators, 24 (66.7%) did not report whether there was
consensus between editors and authors on the retraction decisions, and
28 (77.8%) did not report whether retractions were related to the
post-publication review. `Table 3 <#T3>`__ lists the reasons for
retraction as indicated by relevant journals, which include eight
categories: data issues (17; 42.22%), administrative errors of the
publisher (5; 13.89%), copyright (3; 8.33%), plagiarism (2; 5.56%),
redundant publications (2; 5.56%), study design issues (4; 11.11%),
ethical issues (1; 2.78%), and others (1, 2.78%). Based on the
classification of reasons for paper retraction outlined by the Committee
on Publication Ethics (COPE) (2), 11 (30.56%) out of the 36 retracted
publications were due to honest errors, including occasional errors made
in the original database or experimental data (7; 19.44%) and improper
data manipulation (4; 11.11%).

.. container:: table-wrap
   :name: T3

   .. container:: caption

      .. rubric:: 

      Reasons for retracted publications on schizophrenia-related
      studies.

   +--------------------------+--------------------------+-----+-------+
   | Reason                   | Type                     | *N* | %     |
   +==========================+==========================+=====+=======+
   | Data issues (17, 47.22%) | Honest error (Data       | 11  | 30.56 |
   |                          | error)                   |     |       |
   +--------------------------+--------------------------+-----+-------+
   |                          | Misconduct (Suspicious   | 2   | 5.56  |
   |                          | fabrication)             |     |       |
   +--------------------------+--------------------------+-----+-------+
   |                          | Invalid data             | 3   | 8.33  |
   +--------------------------+--------------------------+-----+-------+
   |                          | Unreplicable results     | 1   | 2.78  |
   +--------------------------+--------------------------+-----+-------+
   |                          | No original data         | 1   | 2.78  |
   +--------------------------+--------------------------+-----+-------+
   | Administrative errors of | –                        | 5   | 13.89 |
   | publisher                |                          |     |       |
   +--------------------------+--------------------------+-----+-------+
   | Study design (4, 11.11%) | Inconsistency with       | 3   | 8.33  |
   |                          | original study design    |     |       |
   +--------------------------+--------------------------+-----+-------+
   |                          | Unclear methodology      | 1   | 2.78  |
   +--------------------------+--------------------------+-----+-------+
   | Copyright                | Material or data used    | 3   | 8.33  |
   |                          | without authorization    |     |       |
   +--------------------------+--------------------------+-----+-------+
   | Plagiarism               | –                        | 2   | 5.56  |
   +--------------------------+--------------------------+-----+-------+
   | Redundant publication    | –                        | 2   | 5.56  |
   +--------------------------+--------------------------+-----+-------+
   | Ethic issue              | No ethical approval      | 1   | 2.78  |
   +--------------------------+--------------------------+-----+-------+
   | Others                   | No permission to publish | 1   | 2.78  |
   |                          | by the author            |     |       |
   +--------------------------+--------------------------+-----+-------+

.. _S4:

Discussion
==========

This is the first bibliometric study on retractions of
schizophrenia-related publications. We identified 36 retractions among
19,176 publications on schizophrenia-related studies. The overall
retraction rate was relatively lower (0.19%) compared with other fields
such as neurosurgery (7.3%) ((n.d.p)). Three-quarters of retractions
occurred during the past decade (2011–2021), a trend similar to the
retractions in the obstetrics literature where 76% of retractions
occurred in the recent decade (2009–2019) ((n.d.y)). This is likely to
be related to the overall growing number of academic publications, which
may lead to increased academic errors. Additionally, publishers have
promoted the awareness of scrutiny of publications ((n.d.aa)). Academic
misconduct has become a priority in the review procedure for many
journals. Currently, many guidelines to standardize the process of
retractions are available; of them, the most authoritative guidelines
were issued by the COPE ((n.d.b)). The number of retractions has grown
since the COPE guidelines were published in 2009 ((n.d.aa)). Our
analysis revealed that the average gap between publication and
retraction time was 1.89 years, which is shorter than the retractions in
other fields such as nursing and midwifery (2.3 years) ((n.d.o)) and
life science research (3.8 years) ((n.d.i)). A longer delay in
retraction may be associated with a more negative academic impact. The
erroneous research findings may mislead other researchers, resulting in
a waste of time, effort, and resources, and may even harm research
participants ((n.d.y)). The high citations of retracted publications
suggest that these retractions continued to have a certain impact on the
schizophrenia research field as some were still cited even after
retraction. Thus, a prompt retraction process is needed and clear signs
and labels, such as attaching a clear watermark to the retraction
((n.d.ad)), may be helpful in preventing further citations of retracted
publications.

The retracted publications identified in this study involved 21 research
areas; however, it should be noted that one retracted article may
involve more than one research area. More than half of the retractions
were classified in the field of Psychiatry (52.78%). The retractions
also involved some experiment-based research areas such as
Neurosciences, Neurology, Pharmacology, Pharmacy, and Behavioral
Sciences. A previous study ((n.d.aa)) found that publications based on
basic experiments were more likely to be retracted for academic
misconduct. Certain countries such as the United Kingdom, United States,
China, Canada, and Germany were associated with the most retractions.
However, these countries also contributed to the most publications in
schizophrenia-related research; the United States contributed the most
publications, followed by the United Kingdom, Germany, China, and Canada
((n.d.x)). Most retractions were published in journals related to
Psychology/Psychiatry, such as the American Journal of Psychiatry,
British Journal of Psychiatry, and Schizophrenia Bulletin. Given the
small number of retractions per journal, we could not examine the
correlation between the number of retractions and the impact factor of
the journals involved. Previous studies on the relationship between
retraction rate and journal impact factor found mixed results including
positive ((n.d.ae)), negative ((n.d.o)), and also non-significant
associations ((n.d.m)).

This study analyzed all the retraction notices comprehensively to
understand the degree of transparency of retractions. Incomplete
information regarding the retraction notices will prevent any assessment
of their historical and academic significance, while inadequate
information can mislead or distort the readers and provide a biased view
((n.d.af)). Thus, promoting the transparency of the retraction notices
is vital to maintain the scientific integrity by acting as a warning or
discontinuation measure ((n.d.ag)). Although the COPE released a
guideline to formalize retraction notices, there has been little or no
change to improve the transparency ((n.d.c)). In our study, although the
reasons for schizophrenia-related retractions were reported, the other
three essential components (e.g., initiators, whether there is consensus
between editors and authors on the retraction decision, and whether
retractions are related to the post-publication review) were mostly
lacking. Possible reasons may include stigma (e.g., fear of reputational
damage or legal responsibility), inconsistent requirements regarding the
retraction notices between journals ((n.d.af)) and difficulties in
implementation. Thus, reform in reporting retractions can encourage
authors and publishers to explain the issues clearly and standardize the
information provided among journals.

Overall, 86% of retractions of schizophrenia-related studies were
attributed to author-related reasons. The most common reason was data
issues, of which 64.7% were honest errors. For example, one paper
published in Nature (111 citations) entitled “Microglia-dependent
synapse loss in type I interferon-mediated lupus” was retracted due to
the non-replicable results in the follow-up experiments ((n.d.ah)).
Another highly-cited paper entitled “Expression of Oct-6, a POUIII
domain transcription factor, in schizophrenia” suggested that Oct-6 may
be a marker of the neuropathology associated with schizophrenia
((n.d.ai)). The data was suspected of being fraudulent; thus, the
authenticity of this finding was in doubt. Other studies were retracted
due to incomplete data ((n.d.aj)), lack of original data ((n.d.ak)), or
errors in data processing that led to biased conclusions ((n.d.al)).
These findings highlight the importance of data accuracy, integrity, and
data double-checking.

In contrast, 13.89% of the retractions were due to journal or publisher
reasons, such as administrative errors, suggesting publishers should
enhance their measures to avoid such errors ((n.d.p)). Three retractions
were due to inconsistencies between the contents or research methods and
the original study design ((n.d.am)–(n.d.an)). For example, Ninomiya et
al. ((n.d.am)) examined the long-term efficacy and safety of blonanserin
for first-episode schizophrenia, which was retracted as subjects did not
satisfy the inclusion criteria. Incorrect or inappropriate research
results could mislead researchers, the public, or even entrepreneurs,
resulting in wasted research funds, selection of ineffective drug
treatments, and unethical profit-making ((n.d.d), (n.d.ao)). A study may
be invalid or potentially harmful if it does not align with the content
of the original study registration. All clinical trials need to be
registered before implementation, such as in the International Clinical
Trials Registry Platform (ICTRP) supported by the World Health
Organization ((n.d.ap)). The aim is to ensure adequate knowledge about
the research, increase research transparency, and strengthen the
validity and value of the scientific evidence base ((n.d.ap)).

The lack of ethical governance is another reason for retractions. One
paper from the American Journal of Gastroenterology with 151 citations
was retracted 10 years after publication; one of the reasons was having
no local ethics committee approval ((n.d.ac)). Thus, authors, editors
and publishers should strengthen the consideration and review of all
submitted research information including appropriate ethical approvals.
The range and frequency of retraction reasons varied between different
academic fields. For example, in both dentistry and obstetrics,
redundant publications, and plagiarism were the most common reasons
((n.d.y), (n.d.aq)), while in the field of pharmacy, falsification, or
data manipulation were the most frequent ((n.d.ar)), which are in
contrast to our findings in schizophrenia-related research. The
development and application of Plagiarism Detection software, such as
iThenticate and Turnitin ((n.d.p), (n.d.aq)), may contribute
considerably to preventing plagiarism issues. Previous studies have
proposed the notion of a “publish or perish” culture to explain the
research misconduct issues ((n.d.a), (n.d.i), (n.d.as)). Quantity and
quality of publications are associated with academic ranking, promotion
and reputation; further monetary incentives in research commonly occur
in some institutions/countries ((n.d.at)). Personality traits combined
with highly competitive pressures appear to drive some researchers to
falsify or fabricate data ((n.d.a)). Moreover, one study in China found
that the majority of survey respondents considered that the current
academic assessment system contributes heavily to academic misconduct
and needs to be reformed to create a healthy academic environment
((n.d.au)). This supports the importance of developing appropriate
academic assessment criteria for researchers. We suggest that the
publication of good-quality research is a collaborative effort between
organizations, publishers, journals and authors to ensure transparency
in reporting, prevent research misconduct and disclose any research
limitations.

There are several limitations to this study. First, following relevant
guidelines of bibliometric analysis ((n.d.av)) and previous studies
((n.d.aw)–(n.d.ax)), the WoS was used in the literature search. However,
the possibility that some studies may be missed could not be excluded.
Second, some retraction notices were conservative in stating the reasons
for retraction and the information was limited. For instance, where the
study results were not reproducible, it was unclear whether this was due
to research misconduct or honest errors. Thus, the retraction notices
should be standardized to improve transparency. Third, not all academic
misconduct could be uncovered by publishers or readers, therefore
retraction rates may well be underestimated.

.. _S5:

Conclusion
==========

This study provides an insight into retractions of schizophrenia-related
research. The distribution of the retractions varied across countries,
journals, and research areas. The number of annual retractions has risen
over the past decade with the implementation of existing retraction
guidelines, and honest errors account for most retractions. Transparency
in reporting retraction notices should be implemented. Researchers
should employ measures to ensure the authenticity of their research
data. Institutional governance needs to improve the scrutiny of
publications and prevent continuing citations and erroneous propagation
after retraction.

.. _S6:

Data availability statement
===========================

The original contributions presented in this study are included in the
article/`Supplementary material <#TS1>`__, further inquiries can be
directed to the corresponding authors.

.. _S7:

Author contributions
====================

PC and Y-TX: study design. PC, X-HL, ZS, YM, and Y-TX: data collection,
analysis, and interpretation. PC, Y-LT, and Y-TX: drafting of the
manuscript. CN: critical revision of the manuscript. All authors
approval of the final version for publication.

.. _S8:

Funding
=======

This study was supported by the Beijing Municipal Science and Technology
Commission (Grant No. Z181100001718124), Beijing Talents Foundation
(Grant No. 2017000021469G222), the University of Macau
(MYRG2019-00066-FHS), Scientific Research Common Program of Beijing
Municipal Commission of Education (KM202010025011), and Beijing
Municipal Science and Tech Commission (Z191100006619061).

.. _S9:

Conflict of interest
====================

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.

.. _S10:

Publisher’s note
================

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and
do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or
those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that
may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its
manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

.. _S11:

Supplementary material
======================

The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyt.2022.937330/full#supplementary-material

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   Click here for additional data file.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B14

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B15

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B16

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B17

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B18

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B20

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B21

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B22

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B23

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B25

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B26

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B27

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B28

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B29

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B30

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B31

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B32

      n.d.ad.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B33

      n.d.ae.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B34

      n.d.af.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B35

      n.d.ag.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B36

      n.d.ah.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B37

      n.d.ai.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B38

      n.d.aj.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B39

      n.d.ak.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B40

      n.d.al.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B41

      n.d.am.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B43

      n.d.an.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B44

      n.d.ao.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B45

      n.d.ap.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B46

      n.d.aq.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B47

      n.d.ar.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B48

      n.d.as.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B49

      n.d.at.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B50

      n.d.au.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B51

      n.d.av.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B52

      n.d.aw.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-B54

      n.d.ax.

.. [1]
   Edited by: Quan-Hoang Vuong, Phenikaa University, Vietnam

.. [2]
   Reviewed by: Minh-Hoang Nguyen, Ritsumeikan Asia Pacific University,
   Japan; Tam-Tri Le, Phenikaa University, Vietnam

.. [3]
   :sup:`†`\ \ These authors have contributed equally to this work

.. [4]
   This article was submitted to Public Mental Health, a section of the
   journal Frontiers in Psychiatry
