==========================================================================================================
Malik Hussain Mubbashar, MB BS, FRCP (London), FRCP (Edinburgh), MRCP (Glasgow), FCPS (Pakistan), FRCPsych
==========================================================================================================



David P. Goldberg
Fareed A. Minhas
:Date: 2021-06


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Formerly Professor and Head of the Institute of Psychiatry, Rawalpindi,
Principal, Rawalpindi Medical College and Vice-Chancellor, University of
Health Sciences, Lahore, Pakistan

Malik Hussain Mubbashar, the leader of psychiatry in Pakistan for a
generation and a pioneer in the development of community mental health
services and psychiatric research, died on 10 August 2020, at the age of
75 years. His work in the establishment of community mental health
services served as a model for such services in low-income countries
throughout the world. Initially, local men were recruited and trained to
provide services to those identified in need. This was soon followed by
school programmes, which enlisted head teachers, persuading them to
include information about mental disorders in their curricula. Professor
Mubasshar was remarkably innovative in his approach, for example,
recruiting children to identify people in their village who might
benefit from seeing a doctor and arranging travel for them. His research
activities were always both scientifically rigorous and highly relevant
to the needs of people with mental health problems in areas where
specialist services were thin on the ground or non-existent. He carried
out a community survey of stress and psychiatric disorder in rural
Punjab, a prevalence study of psychiatric morbidity among the attendees
of a native healer in Rawalpindi, as well as a unique randomised trial
of the impact of a school mental health programme in rural Rawalpindi,
Pakistan. He had a highly productive publication record, authoring or
co-authoring many peer-reviewed papers as well as 28 books.

He was highly effective as a teacher. At the Rawalpindi Medical College
(RMC), where he was Principal for some years, he reorganised
undergraduate education, introducing problem-based learning. As
Vice-Chancellor of the University of Health Sciences, Lahore, he made
the study of behavioural sciences mandatory in undergraduate medical
education. He was responsible for the postgraduate psychiatric training
of large numbers of junior doctors, for many of whom he arranged further
training in the UK, especially with Professor David Goldberg in the
Department of Psychiatry at the University of Manchester, with whom he
developed a special link. When they achieved consultant status, many of
his former trainees would put up a photograph of Professor Mubasshar in
a prominent position in their departments. He was also active in
obtaining legal rights for people with mental illness in Pakistan. After
years of incessant effort, he was instrumental in the passage of the
Mental Health Ordinance 2001. His interest in promoting public policy in
favour of the mentally ill more generally motivated him to make links
with whoever was President of Pakistan at the time.

His influence in psychiatry extended well beyond national boundaries.
His Institute of Psychiatry in Rawalpindi was recognised as a World
Health Organization (WHO) Collaborating Centre for Mental Health
Research and Training, of which he was the Director. Among many other
international positions, he was chair of the Global Mental Health
Network, Global Forum for Health Research at WHO, Geneva. The WHO
Community Mental Health Programme was his brainchild, and he had a
particularly influential link with the development of such programmes in
the WHO Eastern Mediterranean region.

Malik Hussain Mubbashar was born in Lahore on 1 August 1945, the son of
Miraj-ud-din Malik and Shahzadi Anwar. His father was a government
employee in the irrigation department. After completing his medical
training at King Edward Medical College, Lahore, in 1968 with honours,
he underwent further medical and then psychiatric training in London at
Guy's Hospital with David Stafford-Clark. While in England he passed the
membership examinations of three UK medical colleges. He was strongly
motivated by having seen in childhood the ill-treatment of the mentally
ill.

On return to Pakistan in 1972, he was appointed to the Central
Government Hospital, Rawalpindi. However, to his disappointment, the
administration of the hospital made it abundantly clear that he was not
welcome as a psychiatrist and refused him any clinic space to see
psychiatric patients. Manifesting his inevitable grit, as he did
throughout his career, he set up his table and chair under the shade of
a tree in a neglected, remote corner of the hospital. Within 8 years,
his department had grown into an Institute and then into a WHO
Collaborating Centre.

His administrative talents and leadership qualities were rapidly
recognised. Professor Mubbashar was closely involved with the College of
Physicians and Surgeons Pakistan (CPSP), becoming Dean of the newly
formed Faculty of Psychiatry. He was elected President of the Pakistan
Psychiatric Society. He served as Principal of the Rawalpindi Medical
College before going on to become the Vice-Chancellor of the University
of Health Sciences, Lahore.

During his lifetime he was accorded many honours. Two of the highest
civilian awards of the Pakistani government, Hilal-e-Imtiaz and
Sitara-e-Imtiaz, were conferred on him. The CPSP's gold medal for
psychiatry, the most prestigious medal in the field, is named the Malik
Hussain Mubbashar Gold Medal.

In his spare time, he enjoyed visiting rural areas and trekking.

Professor Mubasshar is survived by his wife Dr Yasmin Mubbashar, whom he
married in 1973, children Sabooh, Aamna, Zainab, Saima, Fatima, Maryam
and Imtiaz (five of whom are psychiatrists) and 15 grandchildren.
