======================================================================================================
The challenges and necessity of situating ‘illness narratives’ in recovery and mental health treatment
======================================================================================================

Nagina Khan
Derek K. TracyCorrespondence to Nagina Khan (nkhan786can@gmail.com)
:Date: 2022-04

:Abstract:
   In mental health services, recovery constitutes a guiding principle
   that is endorsed in professional medical guidelines and has become
   central to mental health policies across the world. However, for many
   clinicians, it can be a challenge to effectively embed recovery
   concepts into professionally directed treatment of disease without
   distortion, and ostensibly away from what matters to those who use
   the services. We discuss the evolving and multifaceted concept of
   ‘recovery’, including illness narratives to frame our discussion. We
   demonstrate how integration between a person-directed management of
   illness and a professionally directed treatment of disease can
   converge, resulting in positive outcomes for people with mental
   illness.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Increasingly, patient-led research has been challenging traditional
professional perceptions on the trajectory and outcomes of mental
illness. (Of note, ‘patient' is the stylistic word choice for this
journal; the authors had submitted ‘service user' in the draft. We
recognise this is an area of discussion and debate). Many people may not
fully recover from mental health problems, but can discover how to cope
with their condition. Evidence has also highlighted that recovery, and
many of the processes involved in it, can happen across a period – in
many cases, outside of formal medical environments. In this editorial,
we summarise and discuss contemporary aspects of recovery, including the
co-concept of ‘illness narratives’. We argue that although recovery can
be a contested topic with differing views, it is also ubiquitous, and
its meanings are not always fully incorporated into truly co-produced
models. Models that put patients’ narratives at the core could perform
as a connecting mechanism that provides a process to take account of
‘personalisation’, which is likely to create a better fit with
individual context, structure and the complex diverse realities of
recovery-oriented practice and routinely provided interventions.

.. _sec1:

Definitions and debate
======================

People outside of the formal health settings understand recovery in
terms of their individual, specific and personal perceptions.
Accordingly Anthony has shown that illness can hinder a person's
perception of a productive life and undermine their process of
recovery.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` Anthony's work remains highly influential (and
cited) to definitions of recovery, stressing that ‘recovery is what
people with disabilities do, recovery is a truly unifying human
experience’.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` He also asserts that recovery, is
‘multi-dimensional, defying simplistic measurement’.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)`
Other perspectives on recovery have been explored: Slade has divided
these into two forms, with clinical recovery being defined as symptom
changes viewed by the clinician,\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` and ‘personal recovery’
being defined as what the individual narrates and understands in a
meaningful way.\ :sup:`(n.d.b)`

What is strikingly obvious here is that recovery is being presented in a
distinct and separated pattern. This separation appears to be divided by
the focus and the lens through which it is viewed. It is questionable
whether this separation is helpful both clinically and furthering the
discourse on recovery itself. The separation pushes apart the idea that
‘professionally directed’ treatment and ‘person-directed’ treatment can
converge; indeed, the spirit of recovery would challenge the language of
this – ‘directed’ inferring ‘being done to a person’ and would call for
it to be more fitfully replaced by ‘perspective’. McWade also reinforces
our view that this concept of recovery can be defined in such a way that
allows freedom to converge medical expertise and affords patients the
autonomy in their individual journey to recovery.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)`
Patient movements have dominated the concept of recovery since the
mid-1970s,\ :sup:`(n.d.d)` and currently there has been criticism of
professionals that look to be trying to ‘mainstream’ recovery concepts
to their advantage.\ :sup:`(n.d.e),(n.d.f)`

.. _sec1-1:

Research on recovery
--------------------

There has been a significant amount of research and published work
attempting to support each of the individual recovery concepts, but
little has been done on the positive outcomes of converging the
constructs. Recovery research ranges from personal
accounts\ :sup:`(n.d.g)` to attempts to define, standardise or measure
the conceptual framework,\ :sup:`(n.d.h),(n.d.i)` alongside
histories\ :sup:`(n.d.j)` and empirical studies.\ :sup:`(n.d.k),(n.d.l)`
Recovery-orientated practice guidelines exist for service
provision,\ :sup:`(n.d.m)–(n.d.n)` including an emerging
critique\ :sup:`(n.d.o)` resting on personal
recovery,\ :sup:`(n.d.i),(n.d.p)–(n.d.q)` recovery-oriented
services,\ :sup:`(n.d.f),(n.d.r)–(n.d.s)` in addition to provider
competencies.\ :sup:`(n.d.t),(n.d.u)–(n.d.v)` Despite the accumulation
of research produced to support or isolate contested elements of
recovery, disagreement and criticism remains over the definitions of
recovery and on whether recovery has to be survivor-led or a policy
directive.\ :sup:`(n.d.w)`

Narrative and systematic forms of syntheses and reviews have tested
tools\ :sup:`(n.d.p),(n.d.q)` to incorporate accepted components of
recovery.\ :sup:`(n.d.x),(n.d.y)` This, however, has only led to further
compound the idea of mainstreaming of recovery.\ :sup:`(n.d.w)` Amid
this accumulation of criticisms, Braslow has shown that ‘recovery is
everywhere’ despite including an array of perspectives.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)`
Since the 1990s, the concept of recovery in mental health domain has
affected both the person experiencing mental health difficulties and the
clinicians.\ :sup:`(n.d.w)` A conceptual framework that acknowledges
recovery\ :sup:`(n.d.z),(n.d.v)` has been produced by Leamy et al,
highlighting five main approaches in their CHIME framework:
Connectedness, Hope – optimism, Identity, Meaning – purpose, and
Empowerment.\ :sup:`(n.d.y)` However, CHIME has not been without its
critics. Bird et al carried out a validation study applying thematic
analysis of data from CHIME, using focus groups with those with
diagnosed schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and
depression.\ :sup:`(n.d.v)` They demonstrated that the CHIME framework
was both valid and appropriate for use, but highlighted areas that were
not included, such as ‘a desire for practical support, issues around
diagnosis and medication, and scepticism about the concept of
recovery’.\ :sup:`(n.d.aa)` As noted, evaluating recovery is an
inherently complex concept,\ :sup:`(n.d.ab)` challenging the essence of
creating ‘reliable measures of individual recovery’\ :sup:`(n.d.aa)` and
the construct validity of this. Andresen et al suggest that if the said
concept of recovery is entirely individual,\ :sup:`(n.d.ac)` contrary to
‘what can it be normed and as might be expected for a concept in which
symptom reduction is not paramount’, then ‘correlations with customary
clinical outcome measures may possibly be poor and convergent validity
low’.\ :sup:`(n.d.ad)`

.. _sec1-2:

Embracing diversity
-------------------

Given all of this diversity of recovery principles, it is perhaps not
surprising to find professionals misunderstanding and
confused\ :sup:`(n.d.ab),(n.d.ae)` in the operational aspects,
emphasised in popular guidelines, discourse, policies and research.
Pilgrim aptly suggested that recovery is a polyvalent
concept.\ :sup:`(n.d.ae)` However, this does not translate easily to
those who may wish to activate the recovery construct for better patient
outcomes and improved service delivery. Quiet so, Braslow has argued
that recovery remains an ‘unquestioned overarching principle and
popularly known to include a melange of beliefs, values that
materialized because of the intellectual and social
movements’.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)`

.. _sec2:

Moving to recovery-orientated services
======================================

.. _sec2-1:

An anthropological model
------------------------

To further link back to the discussion on the concept of converging the
person-directed management of illness and professionally directed
treatment, we recognise, similar to Davidson and Roe, that an
anthropological model – one situated upon ‘principles of reciprocity’
that concerns itself more with the integration of
healthcare\ :sup:`(n.d.ab)` – could complement and augment professional
knowledge.\ :sup:`(n.d.af)` However, this requires a substantial shift
in the clinical lens, incorporating ‘lay types of knowledge’, such as a
person's own understandings of dealing with illness, including social
functioning.\ :sup:`(n.d.af)` Suitably, Davidson and Roe conceptualise
that meaningful illness narratives are a gift exchange, providing
meaning, emotive steadiness, narration and collective
experience.\ :sup:`(n.d.ab)`

.. _sec2-2:

Illness narratives and professionals’ treatment
-----------------------------------------------

Biological aspects have often been viewed by patients as both coercive
and impersonal,\ :sup:`(n.d.ag)` although we may be seeing some welcomed
change with this, and COVID-19 may offer an interesting corollary, with
the emphasis of ‘long-COVID’ care moving toward wellness and
self-management of long-term chronic difficulties. Pilgrim has pointed
out that the root basis of patients’ adverse perceptions can be based on
pathology, making clinicians appear as ‘chemotherapists with a
prescription pad’.\ :sup:`(n.d.ag)`

.. _sec2-3:

The UK and co-production: the Care Programme Approach as an exemplar
--------------------------------------------------------------------

In the UK, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
explicitly calls for care plans to be jointly drawn up between
individuals and their clinician, with shared decision-making and agreed
dates to review its progress.\ :sup:`(n.d.ah)` The Care Programme
Approach (CPA) necessitates that health and social needs are
comprehensively assessed and reviewed with individuals with serious
mental illness, with a ‘philosophy of recovery and to foster
personalised care’.\ :sup:`(n.d.ai)–(n.d.aj)`

Despite their imbedding in contemporary British mental
healthcare,\ :sup:`(n.d.ak)` there remains a general lack of data
exploring actual practice in the community, and even less that is
focused on in-patient care.\ :sup:`(n.d.al)` The Healthcare Commission
in the UK assessed in-patient performance across 554 wards in 69
National Health Service (NHS) Trusts. About 40% were rated as ‘weak’
when it came to including patients and carers; astonishingly, half of
care plans had no evidence of recording patients’ views, and about a
third made no mention as to whether there was a carer involved. A
further third had input from the patients’ community care coordinators
only some or none of the time.\ :sup:`(n.d.am)`

Work by Simpson et al examined the views and experiences of stakeholders
involved in community mental healthcare, investigating factors related
to the provision of personalised, collaborative, recovery-focused
care.\ :sup:`(n.d.an)` They found substantial variations among sites for
results on therapeutic relationships and participant groups in their
study, related to the experiences of care planning and understandings of
recovery and personalisation.\ :sup:`(n.d.an)` Consequently, carers
expressed varying levels of input, and despite risk assessments being
part of central clinical concerns, they were rarely discussed with
patients.\ :sup:`(n.d.ao)`

Patients valued therapeutic relationships with care coordinators and
others, and saw these as central to recovery. However, in another study
by the same team, the staff, patient and carer interviews revealed gaps
between shared aspirations and realities,\ :sup:`(n.d.ap)` and staff
accounts of routine collaboration contrasted with patient accounts and
care plan reviews. They also found that personalisation was not a common
phrase, but care was often delivered in an individualised
way.\ :sup:`(n.d.ap)` McWade has argued that this endorses that
perspective of failure of co-opting or mainstreaming the ‘thing’ that is
recovery.\ :sup:`(n.d.c)`

.. _sec2-4:

Contact with clinicians and patient engagement
----------------------------------------------

‘Illness management’ can be understood as an approach to support
patients with a diagnosis to engage with clinicians, to reduce patient
susceptibility to the disease.\ :sup:`(n.d.aq)` Conversely, ‘illness
problems’ are the principal difficulties that symptoms and disability
create in lives, and ‘illness behaviour’ then consists of initiating
treatment (for example, changing diet and activities, resting, engaging
in exercise, taking over-the-counter or prescribed medications and
deciding when to seek care from professionals).\ :sup:`(n.d.ar)` There
is an overdue lack of understanding placed on the notion that there is a
pre-existing underlying relationship between the person and their
illness. Albeit in separation of formal treatment environments, this
occurs in the way individuals perceive their difficulties, the type of
help they envisage, and the approach they are willing to engage with for
formal treatments; it includes making contact with clinicians and
entering into a contract with services for future treatment.

.. _sec2-5:

The socialisation of the practitioner
-------------------------------------

For the purpose of this editorial, a critical discussion cannot be
complete without including a focus on clinicians understandings.
Hitherto, psychiatric models have perhaps viewed the concepts of
recovery from mental illness in a similar style to how clinicians have
viewed physical illnesses.\ :sup:`(n.d.as)` We propose that Kleinman's
illness narratives model has proved influential in this regard,
remarking how the practitioner has also been socialised into a distinct
collective experience of sickness. It is true that clinicians are
trained to capture the essence of illness by using concepts that
delineate disease. For instance the use of expressions such as relapse,
recurrence, remission and recovery.\ :sup:`(n.d.at)` In this way, the
symptom profile is used to transform the patient's illness (in a form of
recasting of illness in accordance with the theories of disorder) into a
disease formation.\ :sup:`(n.d.ar)` The absence of an ongoing
intervention other than that relationship can be perceived by care
managers as a need for premature discharge from services, for fear of
creating dependency. However, some who use services desire an ongoing
relationship, which commonly matters more than interventions, and this
aspect can be missing in some recovery narratives. The construct of
so-called ‘palliative psychiatric care’ is informative in this
regard.\ :sup:`(n.d.au)` Further, moral experience is central to
Kleinman's model of illness narratives, incorporating constructs of
ideal virtues of the practitioner\ :sup:`(n.d.av)` and so opening up
‘illness narratives’ to create patient ‘storylines’, which brings to
life inanimate parts of practices, policies and
discourses.\ :sup:`(n.d.aw),(n.d.ax)` Hajer suggests that storylines are
‘narratives on social reality’, which combine elements from many
different domains and ‘provide actors with a set of symbolic references
that suggest a common understanding’.\ :sup:`(n.d.ay)` Albeit
critically, Kleinman also envisaged that partnership is vital and is
susceptible to change over time, with caregiving perceived as a
construct focused more on ‘doing good for others in their world’ and
projecting that ‘as earnest and naïve as it sounds, it is what medicine
is really about’.\ :sup:`(n.d.az)`

.. _sec2-6:

Patient perspectives of ‘corporate’ recovery/criticism
------------------------------------------------------

Despite the common understandings, it should be noted that some patients
remain suspicious of the recovery concept because it is potentially
intolerant of those who do not change, and so it may remain, in their
eyes, a source of oppression used against them.\ :sup:`(n.d.ba)` There
is a recurring critique of recovery presented as the ‘next best
thing’,\ :sup:`(n.d.bb)` and a mere form of symbolism, undermining
‘authentic alliances’\ :sup:`(n.d.bc)` donning recovery in a sense to
reduce effective support.\ :sup:`(n.d.bd)` Service cuts have been
associated with the manner in which services and health systems manage
future demand for mental healthcare, allied to the economic cutbacks
planned for financial savings.\ :sup:`(n.d.be),(n.d.bf)` Consequently,
recovery concepts used in this method risk being used, or at least
perceived, as indicative of justification to reduce services or their
ability to provide timely input.

.. _sec3:

Moving forward: making it work
==============================

In the majority of English-speaking countries\ :sup:`(n.d.ab)` the
importance clinical recovery\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` and personal recovery are
touted in guidelines for key clinicians.\ :sup:`(n.d.bg)–(n.d.bh)` The
significance of tackling personal recovery, in conjunction with more
standard concepts of clinical recovery,\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` is currently
endorsed in guidance for all key professions.\ :sup:`(n.d.bg)–(n.d.bh)`
Whether it as a model or framework, a movement or a guiding ethos,
recovery is now ‘the hegemonic guiding principle of public mental health
policy’.\ :sup:`(n.d.e)` The social sciences have already reworked
treating disease as a process of medical
micro-encounters,\ :sup:`(n.d.bi)` and to the idea that ‘disease
problems’ can occur within an individual's circumstances of everyday
life.\ :sup:`(n.d.bh)` It is evident that researchers, clinicians and
services alike may require a more complex approach to personal
narratives and construction of meaning if individual recovery is to be
more clearly understood.\ :sup:`(n.d.bj)`

Psychiatric treatment historically conceptualised primarily based on a
disease model could have the potential to impede the long-term treatment
and assessment of those with chronic difficulties and illness. Linked to
this assertion, Voronka has indicated that narratives can be utilised
and shaped as a ‘gap-mending’ strategy,\ :sup:`(n.d.bk)` not merely
because they interfere with professional knowledge, but because they
have the power to strengthen the capabilities of individuals to bring
forth personal goals and generate a sense of identity,\ :sup:`(n.d.bl)`
a fusion, a convergence to create a mechanism of acceptability, of both
person-directed management of illness and professionally directed
treatment of disease, or, in essence, shared understandings of recovery
and shared decision-making toward that outcome. Roberts and Hollins have
also encouraged that medicine ought to discern that ‘disease
understandings’ are embedded in patients’ experiences and their daily
lives, and are considerably tied to a person's social
history.\ :sup:`(n.d.bf)` This necessitates clinicians to move from a
tradition of ‘paternalistic attitudes’ of helping or being the expert,
to create meaningful alliances.\ :sup:`(n.d.bm)` Likewise, Lawton et al
described an approach to illness experiences that recognises a dynamic
interplay between ‘survivor’ and the healthcare system, whereby one
affects the other,\ :sup:`(n.d.bf),(n.d.bi)` suggesting that medical
encounters merely comprise a relatively insignificant portion of most
patients’ lives (although symbolically they may represent more).
Accordingly, the medical support to patients’ ‘sense-making’ tends, in
reality, to be exhausted by the conditions and encounters met in the
extra-medical social world.\ :sup:`(n.d.bn)`

Recognising and embracing recovery concepts enhances care and the
therapeutic experience for professionals and patients. The possible
‘recursivity’ between services and perceptions is relevant to
understanding the way in which those with mental health problems might
engage with care services.\ :sup:`(n.d.bo),(n.d.bn)` Peer support is
increasingly recognised and implemented within NHS services, with roles
in the UK typically at band 4/5; indeed, the Health Education England
publication ‘Stepping Forward to 2021: The Mental Health Workforce Plan
in England’ advocates even greater expansion of this.\ :sup:`(n.d.bp)`
Nevertheless, there has equally been a call and need to deliver care in
ways that have just not been possible in traditional teams. A
potentially very fruitful and positive development in this regard has
been the growth of recovery colleges, driven by strong patient
engagement and roles, often at odds with, or at blurred boundaries to
mainstream NHS services. Accordingly, central to improving outcomes for
individuals, services should involve providing services that are
‘person-centred, strengths-based and recovery-focused’.\ :sup:`(n.d.bq)`
To enable the interpretation of the recovery approach into practice,
there is a necessity to involving illness narratives as a mechanism to
personalise treatment and care so that it can be operated and assessed
within medical and research environments.\ :sup:`(n.d.p),(n.d.t)`

**Nagina Khan,** PhD PGCert BHSc, Senior Research Associate, College of
Osteopathic Medicine, Touro University Nevada, Henderson, USA; **Derek
K. Tracy,** FRCPsych, Consultant Psychiatrist and Clinical Director,
Oxleas NHS Foundation Trust, Queen Mary's Hospital, UK; and Senior
Lecturer, King's College London, UK

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

.. _sec-das:

Data availability
=================

Data sharing not applicable – no new data generated.

N.K. conceived the idea, wrote the first draft and led the writing. N.K.
and D.K.T. participated equally in the development and editing of the
writing.

.. _sec4:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2021.4.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

.. _nts6:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref3

      n.d.c.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref4

      n.d.d.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref5

      n.d.e.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref6

      n.d.f.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref7

      n.d.g.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref8

      n.d.h.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref9

      n.d.i.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref10

      n.d.j.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref11

      n.d.k.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref12

      n.d.l.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref13

      n.d.m.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref17

      n.d.bl.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref18

      n.d.n.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref19

      n.d.o.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref20

      n.d.p.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref22

      n.d.q.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref23

      n.d.r.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref25

      n.d.t.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref29

      n.d.s.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref30

      n.d.u.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref33

      n.d.z.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref34

      n.d.x.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref36

      n.d.v.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref37

      n.d.w.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref38

      n.d.y.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref39

      n.d.aa.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref40

      n.d.ab.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref41

      n.d.ac.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref42

      n.d.ad.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref43

      n.d.ae.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref44

      n.d.af.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref45

      n.d.ag.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref46

      n.d.ah.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref47

      n.d.ai.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref49

      n.d.aj.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref50

      n.d.ak.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref51

      n.d.al.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref52

      n.d.am.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref53

      n.d.an.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref54

      n.d.ao.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref55

      n.d.ap.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref56

      n.d.aq.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref57

      n.d.ar.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref58

      n.d.as.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref59

      n.d.at.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref60

      n.d.au.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref61

      n.d.av.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref62

      n.d.aw.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref63

      n.d.ax.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref64

      n.d.ay.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref65

      n.d.az.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref66

      n.d.ba.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref67

      n.d.bb.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref68

      n.d.bc.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref69

      n.d.bd.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref70

      n.d.be.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref71

      n.d.bf.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref72

      n.d.bg.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref73

      n.d.bo.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref74

      n.d.bq.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref76

      n.d.bh.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref77

      n.d.bi.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref78

      n.d.bj.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref79

      n.d.bk.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref80

      n.d.bm.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref81

      n.d.bn.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref82

      n.d.bp.
