============================================================================================================
Safety of Delivering Eating Disorders Day Treatment Programme on the Virtual Platform in (COVID-19) Pandemic
============================================================================================================



Adaora Obiekezie
Claudia Friel
Mohammad Tayeem Pathan*Presenting author.
:Date: 2022-06

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims
      :name: sec_a1

   Intensive treatment for eating disorders include day treatment
   programme and specialist inpatient. COVID-19 pandemic led to lockdown
   in the UK on the 23rd March 2020. Adult Eating Disorders Day
   Treatment Programme in Surrey started delivering their care on the
   virtual platform from that date. It offered a combination of
   ‘virtual’ only and ‘blended’ care (virtual and in person) for more
   than a year. This service evaluation examined the safety of
   delivering intensive eating disorders treatment on the virtual
   platform.

   .. rubric:: Methods
      :name: sec_a2

   Data from March 2020 to March 2021 were retrospectively collected
   from Electronic patient record. Two clinicians collected the data on
   age, referral origin, accommodation, employment status, diagnosis
   (subtype), length of illness, comorbid mental and physical health
   diagnosis, duration of day care treatment, medication, admission
   weight and BMI, discharge weight and BMI, changes in bloods and ECG,
   acute hospital admission, risk-to-self events, admissions to
   Specialist Eating Disorders Unit and reasons for discharge.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a3

   Data indicated that 21 patients were admitted in day treatment
   programme over 1 year period. 10 patients had solely virtual
   treatment and 11 patients had blended day treatment programme. 11
   patients had anorexia nervosa restrictive subtype, 5 patients had
   Anorexia Binge purge subtype and 5 patients had Anorexia Nervosa,
   Unspecified.

   Average length of illness was 4.49 years. Mean age for the group was
   24.7 years and most patients lived with family (n 18) and were
   unemployed (n 11). More than 2/3rd (76%) patients had comorbid mental
   health diagnosis and 48% (n 10) had comorbid physical health
   diagnosis.

   Average length of admission was 5.26 months. Mean BMI on admission
   was 15.3 (Range 12–19) and mean BMI on discharge was 16.9 (Range
   13.65–22).

   Safety and outcome data indicated that there were no serious
   incidents recorded in that time period. 1 (5%) patients required
   admission to acute hospital as their physical health deteriorated. 8
   (38%) patients required specialist inpatient admission as the day
   care did not affect any changes to their eating behaviours, and 4
   (19%) patients had events indicating self harm episodes(19%).

   .. rubric:: Conclusion
      :name: sec_a4

   Our service evaluation data indicated that it is relatively safe to
   deliver day treatment programme on the virtual platform. Weekly face
   to face physical health monitoring (weight, BP, Pulse, temperature)
   and regular physical health investigations (Blood tests and ECG) were
   integral part of managing risks to health. On the other hand,
   delivering day treatment programme on the virtual platform has
   enabled the day treatment programme to prevent any significant
   outbreak of COVID-19 in a vulnerable group of patients and allowed
   them to receive uninterrupted support during pandemic.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
