pmc
The ‘\ *Cognitive Sports Therapy Manual’* is a 120-page book centred on
holistic, fundamental concepts, such as ‘mind, body, breath’, for
supporting mental health. It is based on 12-week practical courses and
support groups (available at
`www.cognitivesportstherapy.com <www.cognitivesportstherapy.com>`__),
designed by a founding Multi Disciplinary Team composed of psychiatric,
general practice, yoga and exercise professionals. It includes the use
of non-medical jargon and practical tools, such as a gratitude
journaling, screening tools, care planning, worksheets and calendar
logs, for tracking personal progress related to ‘mind, body and breath’
exercises.

This type of manual is timely, particularly given the emerging robust
evidence base for the therapeutic role of ‘lifestyle psychiatry’ (e.g.
exercise, nutrition, sleep, stress management and adverse health
behaviours) within severe mental illness. The back of the manual makes
reference to some of these key papers and texts.

Within front-line psychiatry work, the use of some of these proposed,
alternative therapeutic methods is well aligned with the preventative
direction of the NHS Long Term Plan. This may prompt traditional Multi
Disciplinary Teams to include professionals who can optimise such
lifestyle factors (e.g. physiotherapists), particularly when patients
with severe mental illness cite lack of staff support as a major barrier
to physical activity engagement.

Despite idealism toward holistic interventions, we also have evidence
from pragmatic trials led by
`Gaughran <https://bmcpsychiatry.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12888-017-1571-0>`__
et al (https://doi.org/10.1186/s12888-017-1571-0), demonstrating the
challenges of embedding positive lifestyle factors for severe mental
illness. Therefore, this type of manualised approach may be more suited
as a well-being strategy for those with higher levels of motivation.
Further, I believe that the book should have included a screening
function or content related to the risks of over-reliance on exercise as
a coping mechanism, as we know this can result in exercise addiction and
associated dysfunctional eating behaviours.

In summary, I enjoyed reading this manual and knowing that there are
professional initiatives exploring holistic, lifestyle factor
optimisation that can benefit individuals across the mental health
spectrum.
