=================================================================================================================================
Perspectives: involving persons with lived experience of mental health conditions in service delivery, development and leadership
=================================================================================================================================

:Author: Charlene Sunkel
:Author: Claudia SartorCorrespondence to Charlene Sunkel
         (charlene.sunkel@gmhpn.org)
:Date: 2022-06
:Abstract:
   Globally, there has been an emphasis on the importance and value of
   involving people with lived experience of mental health conditions in
   service delivery, development and leadership. Such individuals have
   taken on various roles, from peer support specialists and other
   specialised professions to leadership in mainstream industries. There
   are, however, still obstacles to overcome before it is possible to
   fully include people with lived experience at all levels in the
   mental health and related sectors. This article discusses the
   benefits, both to the individual and to the public, of involving
   persons with lived experience in service delivery, development and
   leadership.


pmc
The World Health Organization (WHO) describes advocacy as ‘an important
means of raising awareness on mental health issues and ensuring that
mental health is on the national agenda of governments. Advocacy can
lead to improvements in policy, legislation and service
development’.\ :sup:`1` By this definition, people with lived experience
of mental health conditions (hereafter referred to as ‘persons with
lived experience’) have increasingly become the driving force behind
advocacy and awareness work globally, and have entered the mental health
workforce in various capacities of service delivery, from peer-to-peer
support work to professional occupations in the field of mental health
and human rights.

The all-encompassing objective of lived experience involvement is
development and leadership and to create communities in which people
with lived experience are able not only to survive but rather thrive
with a mental health condition.

.. _sec1:

Obstacles for lived experience involvement in service delivery, development and leadership
==========================================================================================

Despite the growing acknowledgement of the value of lived experience,
there are still a number of obstacles to overcome before it is possible
to fully include people with lived experience at all levels. We are
embedded in frameworks of shared values and beliefs – social, cultural
and environmental factors that directly and indirectly influence
psychopathology.\ :sup:`2` Our experiences throughout our life journeys
largely determine the nature of our perceptions and our attitudes
towards notions. Although there is undoubtedly a complex connection
between culture and mental illness, negative perceptions and
insensitivity result in stigma, discrimination and violations of human
rights.The language used to talk about mental health also creates
barriers because the way in which we understand, and subsequently
express, experiences can be easily misinterpreted and consequently
negative assumptions are made about others. It is therefore imperative
to obtain clarity in the distinction between terms such as ‘mental
health’ and ‘mental illness’.\ :sup:`3`\ People continue to believe that
individuals with mental health conditions are violent, mad, lazy,
possessed by demons\ :sup:`4` and incapable of positively contributing
to society and the economy. Negative stereotypes and inaccurate
portrayals such as these affect help-seeking behaviour and result in an
unwillingness of those suffering to seek support from loved ones. People
ought to be cognisant that when they perpetrate and share negative
stereotypes, it has an impact on the entire recovery process and it
affects not only those who struggle with mental illness but also those
working in the mental health field. The fact is that negative
perceptions lead to prejudice at home, in the workplace, within local
communities and within our healthcare systems.\ :sup:`3`

Apart from these attitudinal barriers, social determinants of mental
illness,\ :sup:`5` including poor education, unemployment and poverty,
further hinder opportunities for people with lived experience to develop
leadership potential, pursue their passion for mental health work and
follow a career in mental health advocacy and service delivery.
Specifically, poor education along with a lack of access to adequate
information are contributing factors that result in low mental health
and human rights literacy among the more disadvantaged people with lived
experience who are subjected to social and economic
inequalities.\ :sup:`5`

.. _sec2:

Lived experience in development and leadership
==============================================

Lived experience advocates who have pursued a passion to improve mental
healthcare and services have been using their own experiences and
recovery journeys as a means to highlight the gaps, not only within the
mental healthcare system but also within other societal systems outside
of the healthcare sector. Lived experience advocates have, of course,
also challenged the status quo and taken a stand on a human rights
perspective as the foundation of change, transformation and systems
strengthening. Building on this, there is growing recognition of the
value of persons with lived experience as agents of change through
contributing their unique expertise, in-depth knowledge of navigating
systems, first-hand experience of segregation and discrimination, and
their ability to provide high-level and practical solutions. This
recognition places persons with lived experience as experts by
experience and leaders of development and change, through their
influence on policy and practice.

At a global level, there is evidence that mental health guidelines,
strategies and policies have notably become more consistent in including
lived experience perspectives and recognising those experiences as
integral to service development, implementation, monitoring and
evaluation. Engagement with persons with lived experience is critical to
identify the flaws in the system – what others may perceive as a complex
breakdown in the system may often be repaired with simple, practical,
cost-effective and innovative solutions proposed by the users of that
particular system or service.

The Global Mental Health Peer Network (GMHPN), an international lived
experience organisation, was established to enhance the voices of
persons with lived experience across the world and has a specific focus
on leadership development. That focus derived from the recognition of
the obstacles (described above) that ultimately deny countries the
expertise and value that people with lived experience are able to
contribute to improving the accessibility and quality of mental
healthcare and services at the local level. The GMHPN's executive
structure is designed to develop new global lived experience leadership
and create a sophisticated platform for diverse lived experience voices
to be at the forefront of change. Empowerment as a critical element in
leadership development is built into the GMHPN structure. Lived
experience leaders are appointed to the GMHPN Executive Committee as
representatives of their respective country or region, and ultimately
serve in an advisory capacity, contribute to the development of
strategies to achieve common advocacy goals and ultimately influence
policy and practice.

The benefits of people with lived experience in leadership positions is
evident from the following statements (all statements in this article
appear with the permission of those named). “‘Since I have been
appointed as the Deputy Representative for the African Region on the
GMHPN Regional Executive Committee, it has given me the courage to think
big. It has made me a person with a mission, to bring some meaningful
changes on how people perceive mental health, not only in my country
Zimbabwe but in Africa. This has given me a chance to dream big about
how people with psychosocial disabilities throughout the world should
live – with dignity and stigma-free.’ (Angelica Mkorongo,
Zimbabwe)‘Learning from shared experiences from other GMHPN members has
largely widened my horizon to see what can be achieved through lived
experience advocacy. Gatherings of such courageous individuals with high
calibre from diverse geographical and cultural settings for the common
cause of lived experience advocacy is really eye-opening. This has
greatly impacted my understanding of mental health being a global issue.
I can definitely certify that my engagement as Country Executive
Committee representative for Ethiopia is the greatest empowering,
uplifting, and inspiring experience I ever had in my journey as global
mental health advocate and as a person with lived experience.’ (Eleni
Misganaw, Ethiopia)‘My position as regional representative for Africa on
the GMHPN Regional Executive Committee means a lot for me as a person,
and for persons living with mental health conditionsin my country. It is
validating of our experiences and an opportunity for me to join other
global voices to make mental health matter. It is also a wonderful
global opportunity to de-stigmatize mental illness and advocate for
better inclusion policies with regard to persons with lived experiences,
especially in a region like mine where mental illness is generally
considered taboo, due to witchcraft or spiritual attacks.’ (Marie
Abanga, Cameroon)‘My role in the GMHPN on the Regional Executive
Committee enables me to empower individuals with lived experiences,
bring forth issues such as local laws and civil society support, and
bring together the larger issues of universal rights concerning mental
health, such as basic income and housing, employment rights and peer and
ally support networks. This position allows me to gain insight and
mobilize resources to address challenges unique to the cultural
understanding of mental health in South East Asia, allowing a culturally
relevant solution-focussed approach.’ (Anjali Singla, India)‘My role on
the GMHPN Regional Executive Committee is a vitalizing booster to what
sometimes feel like a rocky up-cliff journey, and an active propeller to
encourage lived experiences to be part of the strategy in building
mentally healthy workplaces. It is crucial to share best practices
within and across regions so we do it together, and in a way that
respects local cultures and thoughts.’ (Enoch Li, China)”

.. _sec3:

Lived experience in service delivery
====================================

Persons with lived experience have not only been users of services but
many have become service providers themselves – something that would
never have been imagined just a few decades ago. However, in our
experience, even today it is still unimaginable in some countries that
someone with a mental health condition can in fact be meaningfully
employed, let alone employed within the mental healthcare workforce.

Several GMHPN Executive Committee members (with lived experience) from
across the world are service providers in various capacities – some of
these members kindly provided insights into their work and shared the
benefits of being a person with lived experience who is providing a
mental healthcare service.

.. _sec3-1:

Virtual support group facilitator: Sandra Ferreira (South Africa)
-----------------------------------------------------------------

“‘I facilitate online mental health support groups during the COVID-19
pandemic. The virtual platform has provided participants from across the
world the opportunity to voice their experiences during the pandemic and
discuss the impact on their mental health.One of the most interesting
observations that I have drawn from this experience was that many of the
participants were actively involved in advocacy and awareness work in
their respective countries. This is not uncommon as our struggles often
lead to the need to better the road for those that may follow, aligned
with a need to be relevant, to be valued and to make a difference.
Essentially, giving us a purpose.In its purest form, this virtual
support group has been a space to “unmask”, to breathe easy, and to be
free – not only during current struggles of dealing with the pandemic
and the restrictions it has imposed on our daily lives but also to just
be yourself without judgment.The greatest benefit from providing a
support service is the validation that through helping others, we are
helping ourselves become better human beings, more knowledgeable
advocates, and most importantly, more empathetic supporters of
humankind.’”

.. _sec3-2:

Founder of an online peer support platform (CARA Unmask): Bernard Ang (Singapore)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

“‘Reflecting back on my journey with depression, I wish I could have
opened up about my mental health issues to someone who listened and
understood. My experiences led to me founding CARA Unmask
(`caraunmask.com <caraunmask.com>`__), an online peer support platform
that encourages people to reach out earlier rather than later, to have a
chat about their mental health. We recognize the direct benefits that
come from wanting to share valuable lived experiences, which creates
purpose, cultivates a sense of gratitude, facilitates personal growth
and simply paying it forward. Peer support is evidence-based and proven
to work effectively, side-by-side with clinical support for a
sustainable long-term recovery outcome.’”

.. _sec3-3:

Peer support specialist: Syd Gravel (Canada)
--------------------------------------------

“‘It was worrisome at first – that first peer meeting. Knowing how
complex and confusing things had been for me being mentally injured by a
traumatic incident at work. Now, the psychologist was asking me if I
would be willing to meet others who were also injured in similar
situations. The goal was to see how we could help each other by sharing
our experiences so that we would realize that we were not alone. I was
not even sure I knew how to help myself let alone someone else.I
wondered how this conversation could even start – how was this meeting
going to help me? How could sharing my situation help someone else?That
was 32 years ago and since that evening of our first peer support
meeting, I have never looked back, as we created a bond that never
waned. We are in touch with each other, to this day. I am now a
full-time consultant on trauma management and peer support development
for First Responder agencies and author to several books on the subject.
Amazing isn't it, how when life throw us lemons, we can learn to make
lemonade.’”

.. _sec3-4:

Social worker: Thandiwe Mkandawire (Zimbabwe)
---------------------------------------------

“‘During my training as a clinical social worker, my therapist once said
to me “We all become therapists because we all have psychological pain
we are trying to heal, to find our true selves and in doing this work,
not only do we help others, we also help ourselves”. The healing of the
mind, as is any form of healing, is painful and difficult as it takes
honesty, vulnerability, courage and bravery to face your emotions and
engage in the necessary war of fighting the rhetoric in your
mind.Working in the field of mental health and listening to service
users and carers share their stories and their truths in support groups,
at awareness campaigns or clinic days at the hospitals, fighting through
self-stigma and societal stigma and discrimination, allowed me to
realize that experiences are as unique as the person, a person's truth
cannot be classified as greater or lesser than the next person's. My
experience is my truth and it needs to be shared’.”

.. _sec3-5:

Advanced lived experience practitioner: Mark Sanderson (UK)
-----------------------------------------------------------

“‘I have worked in mental health services since 2016. I started as a
volunteer on an inpatient ward, where I had been a previous inpatient.
After 6 months of volunteering, I was employed into a paid peer support
role. Within my first year I won a runner up prize for innovation, which
boosted my confidence. I continued to grow in the role and was
constantly given opportunities to contribute to service development and
presented at various conferences and training sessions. I am currently
pursuing a Master's degree in Mental Health Recovery and Social
Inclusion.I continued to advance in my career and obtained a non-peer
position, which involved supporting the discharge process of service
users from the ward into the community. Alongside this role I worked
with the senior management team to develop a senior peer support
position within the inpatient setting and simultaneously was working
with another manager to develop a senior peer support position for the
community.In around four and a half years I have worked my way from a
volunteer to an Advanced Lived Experience Practitioner and have found my
studies to play an essential role in my development. Moving forward I
aim to continue developing in lived experience roles within the NHS.’”

.. _sec3-6:

Psychiatrist: Raluca Mirela (Romania)
-------------------------------------

“‘Working in child and adolescent psychiatry as a person with lived
experience and as a former victim of psychological and physical child
abuse was often more of an emotional curse than a benefit, because I
deeply empathise with the children for whom I felt responsible. My
frustrations resulted from working with families that were not used to a
bio-psychosocial approach – and they often asked me why I am talking so
much about their child, because they just wanted the medical certificate
(in order to apply for disability aid). They were not familiar with
taking children to other specialists like neurologists, paediatricians,
or to psychotherapy, and mostly refused to do so by justifying that they
do not have money or time (even if they receive a paid medical leave to
take their children to the doctor). Despite the emotional burden,
working with compliant families and seeing the improvement in their
child's health (mentally and emotionally) gives me enormous joy and a
motivational boost.’”

.. _sec4:

Discussion
==========

Global recognition of the importance of the role of persons with lived
experience in mental healthcare has gained momentum, with academics,
clinicians, researchers and mental health organisations placing emphasis
on improving the status quo through peer support systems and improved
service delivery.

Caution, however, must be exercised in our approach and we must take
into account the implications of the diverse experiences of individuals
in their mental health recovery processes and recognise that ‘many
people with lived experience lack the confidence or ability to
articulate their views, particularly if they contradict the status quo
and especially when speaking to people who hold similar roles to those
who have taken choices away from us’.\ :sup:`6`

Nevertheless, there is no denying that there is potential for leadership
development of persons with lived experience in mainstream industries.
Mental healthcare organisations ought to take the lead in driving
initiatives by wisely employing the insights of persons with lived
experience. Strategies for peer support-based service delivery is
encouraged because having the support of a peer who has been exposed to
similar experiences has a way of allowing for meaningful conversation in
a safe environment. The conventional hierarchy of clinician and client
or patient does not apply in peer support systems, as the focus is
placed on peer relationships and the development of trust among peers.
The challenge, however, lies in ensuring that the discipline of lived
experience in mental healthcare does not become too codified or
regulated, as it will lose its real purpose and lose what is the most
important reason for someone's existence.\ :sup:`7`

It is likely that people who enter the field of mental healthcare do so
because of their desire to help others and often also because of their
personal experience of mental health conditions. In principle, having
lived experience and having knowledge of service delivery and its
corresponding processes provides them with an ‘advantage’ of being in a
better position to step into another's shoes and be truly empathetic to
their clients’ or patients’ needs and vulnerabilities. In most cases
people choose to become therapists to make a difference in someone
else's life, to be appreciated for making a difference in society and to
help others who have struggled with similar painful experiences as they
did.\ :sup:`8`

Given the above, by empowering persons with lived experience by means of
education and by developing and maintaining leadership roles there will
undoubtedly be a positive move towards improvement in mental health
recovery. Therefore, stakeholders are encouraged to further explore the
value of peer support as well as the personal experiences of clinicians
for improved mental health recovery and improved quality of service
delivery. Lastly, all stakeholders must ensure that they take into
consideration the inputs and recommendations of persons with meaningful
and authentic lived experience and implement them in their strategies
and policies.

**Charlene Sunkel** is founder and chief executive officer (CEO) of the
Global Mental Health Peer Network, Roodepoort, South Africa. **Claudia
Sartor** is deputy CEO of the Global Mental Health Peer Network,
Roodepoort, South Africa.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

.. _nts5:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.
