pmc
‘Nature is the future’ reads the design on Elli's sweatshirt, and yet
there is nothing natural about Elli or what lies ahead for her. Elli is
an android robot, designed to closely resemble a certain 10-year-old
girl, who lives with her ‘Papa’ – a man whose real daughter went missing
10 years earlier. Papa keeps Elli in his home as a daughter and sexual
companion, and together they reminisce on times when she was alive. So
goes the premise of *The Trouble with Being Born*, directed by emerging
Austrian filmmaker Sandra Wollner.

Controversial for obvious reasons, the film was withdrawn from the 2020
Melbourne International Film Festival when two forensic psychologists
publicly expressed their opposition to its inclusion in the programme.
They cited concerns about the film's alleged normalisation of sexual
interest in children and its possible exploitation by paedophilic
audiences, reigniting a national debate about film censorship.
Certainly, the film is ethically challenging and difficult to watch at
times, but it has much to offer artistically and psychologically.

*The Trouble with Being Born* is a masterful study of trauma, grief,
memory, loneliness and the nature of human (and non-human)
relationships. Breathtaking in its complexity and vision, the film
explores its disturbing subject matter in a detached (perhaps
dissociative) formalistic style, reminiscent of Michael Haneke,
Wollner's older compatriot. Far from endorsing the perverse relationship
between father/adult and daughter/child, the film is a techno-dystopian
parable, warning its audience of the egregious consequences of
humanity's attempts to technologically circumvent and transcend the
terrible but ordinary vicissitudes of life.

The story pivots when Elli gets lost in the forest surrounding her house
and is discovered by a man who gifts her to his elderly mother, Mrs
Schikowa. Elli is re-programmed to be Emil – a likeness of Schikowa's
brother, who died 60 years earlier. Triggered by reminders of his
previous life as Elli, Emil's identity and memory become entangled with
Elli's and he becomes increasingly unpredictable, leading us to the
film's tragic climax.

Elli and Emil are two ghosts in a machine who haunt the people they left
behind, and their unnatural resurrection leads to unnatural
consequences. Both Papa and Schikowa are trapped in their grief and
guilt – Papa will not confront his loss and keeps himself frozen in the
moment of his daughter's disappearance and Schikowa foolishly revisits
and attempts to repair her childhood experiences with Emil. Despite its
futurism, *The Trouble with Being Born* bears a sense of the archetypal
in its exploration of primal anxieties around death, incest and
aloneness.

The storytelling in this film is not straightforward and the audience is
not left with an answer to the existential question implied by the
film's title. Yet the crafted confusion of past and present, and the
moral morass we are offered in this film, are signs of Wollner's
penetrating insight into the disorder and ambiguity of human nature and
experience.
