===========================================================
Recognition and management of depression in early psychosis
===========================================================



Zainab Bashir
Sian Lowri Griffiths
Rachel UpthegroveCorrespondence to Dr Sian Lowri Griffiths
(s.l.griffiths@bham.ac.uk)
:Date: 2022-04

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   Depression in first-episode psychosis (FEP) is highly prevalent and
   associated with poor outcomes; it has become increasingly recognised
   and adopted in national and international guidelines for psychosis.
   Using a 26-item questionnaire, this study aimed to explore if this
   shift has led to greater recognition among UK psychiatrists, and more
   effective management of depression in FEP.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   Of the 297 respondents, 54.4% observed depression occurring in
   chronic psychosis, with the least number of respondents (17.7%)
   identifying depression occurring frequently during FEP. Although
   there was reasonable agreement in the use of antidepressants as a
   first-line treatment for depression (70% prescribing
   antidepressants), there was uncertainty around assessing depression
   and delineating from psychosis symptoms, and particularly negative
   symptoms.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Evidence-based treatments for comorbid depression in psychosis will
   lead to clearer national guidelines, allowing for optimal management
   of depression in early psychosis, potentially leading to improved
   outcomes for these individuals.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Depression is prevalent in first-episode psychosis (FEP), with rates of
up to 70% at illness onset.\ :sup:`1` It is associated with a higher
risk of relapse,\ :sup:`2` poorer functional outcomes\ :sup:`3,4` and
suicide.\ :sup:`5` Although the National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence (NICE) recommends monitoring for depression within psychosis,
specific guidance on the treatment of comorbid depression has been
limited, until recently.\ :sup:`6,7` The lack of large-scale controlled
trials investigating the effectiveness of adjunctive
antidepressants\ :sup:`8` has perhaps resulted in considerable variation
in prescribing practices.\ :sup:`6,9` A study of 80 000 international
psychiatrists showed little consensus on the best management strategy
for treating depression in schizophrenia; a third of clinicians reported
that they rarely or never prescribe antidepressants in combination with
antipsychotics.\ :sup:`9,10` Since this publication in 2001,\ :sup:`9`
depression as a common occurrence in psychosis has become more widely
recognised.\ :sup:`11,12` Monitoring for depression in psychosis is
featured more commonly in national and international
guidelines,\ :sup:`7` and the recent British Association for
Psychopharmacology updated consensus statement is the first UK guide to
include specific pharmacological treatment recommendations.\ :sup:`13`

We aim to understand whether there has been an improvement in clinician
awareness of depression in psychosis; this may have an impact on
effective management, particularly in the early stages of psychosis,
where treatment is likely to be more effective.\ :sup:`14` Using a
survey which was distributed to UK psychiatrists, this study aimed to
explore the level of recognition and management of depression through
the course of FEP.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

.. _sec1-1:

Participants
------------

Participants were members of the Royal College of Psychiatrists, which
is a professional organisation of psychiatrists based in the UK. The
sample therefore comprised psychiatrists of various ages and career
stage, from those in training to consultant level. Although there are
around 8700 psychiatrists registered at the Royal College of Psychiatry,
the survey was targeted at, and only distributed to, the general adult
faculty. Participants were given the opportunity to enter into a prize
draw to win £200 worth of Amazon vouchers.

.. _sec1-2:

Measures
--------

.. _sec1-2-1:

Management of Depression in Psychosis questionnaire
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Management of Depression in Psychosis questionnaire is a shortened
version of Siris et al's original questionnaire.\ :sup:`9` It was felt
to be the most suitable as it was designed to evaluate clinician
awareness and management approach. It also allows for comparison of
trends of psychiatric practices in assessing and managing depression in
psychosis over time. The questionnaire has been adapted to focus on the
identification of depression and prescribing in the early course of
psychosis. For the purpose of this study, recognition of depression is
defined as assessing for the three cardinal symptoms of depression,
namely low mood, anhedonia and anergia. The questionnaire was built into
Survey Monkey for ease, practicality and anonymous online
administration. The questionnaire was completed anonymously and
comprised 23 questions relating to the following: demographic
characteristics of the respondents (e.g. gender, years since graduation,
specialty/subspecialty and region of practice); recognition of symptoms
relevant to the diagnosis of depression; depression time course in
psychosis; factors and symptoms that prompt the prescription of
antidepressants; evaluation measures; and treatment selection and
practice (e.g. medication dose and duration).

.. _sec1-2-2:

Procedure
~~~~~~~~~

The questionnaires were completed over a period of 2 months after being
granted ethical approval and agreed sponsorship by University of
Birmingham (REC Reference: ERN_18-1658). Participants were provided with
information about the study, informed of the voluntary nature of their
participation, and reminded that responses were anonymous with the
option to opt in for the prize draw. Written informed consent was
obtained from all participants.

.. _sec1-3:

Data analysis
-------------

Data were downloaded from Survey Monkey (see
http://www.surveymonkey.co.uk/r/Depression_in_psychosis_survey) and
inspected using a Microsoft Excel (365 for Windows) worksheet.
Descriptive statistics were explored using SPSS version 24 for Windows.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

In total, there were 297 respondents; although on average, it was
observed that a third of the participants who completed the survey also
skipped at least one question in the questionnaire. A total of 52% were
male, and on average, the sample had 21 years (s.d. 11.5) of practice
since graduating from medical school. Responses by geographical regions
were as follows: London (13.4%), South-East (12.4%), West Midlands
(11.9%), South-West (11.9%) and Scotland (11.9%). We had the least
responses from Wales (2.6%), Northern Ireland (2.6) and East Midlands
(3.6%), and 26.8% of participants did not give a response. The majority
of the respondents were clinicians that practiced within community
settings (67.7%).

.. _sec2-1:

Observed prevalence and time course of depression in psychosis
--------------------------------------------------------------

A total of 41.2% of participants had a case-load of which patients with
psychosis comprised >50%; 46.6% had between 5–50% and 1.3% had <5%. The
majority of respondents reported observing depression occurring
concurrently with chronic stable psychosis (54.4%), and 23% reported
depression occurring concurrently with acute relapse. With regards to
depression emerging in the initial phase of illness, 19.1% observed
depression within the prodromal phase to the acute psychotic phase;
32.4% reported depression emerging as the first acute episode of
psychosis resolves, and 17.7% of respondents reported observing
depression during the first episode of psychosis.

.. _sec2-2:

Assessment and diagnosis of depression in psychosis
---------------------------------------------------

Respondents were asked to select the first five most relevant symptoms
they consider in diagnosing depression in psychosis: 93.2% identified
low mood, 68.3% identified anhedonia, 57.1% identified suicidal
thoughts, 53.2% identified poor motivation and 48.3% identified interest
in life as a symptom. Please see `Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__ for the full
breakdown of symptoms reported by respondents. Fig. 1Breakdown of main
symptoms identified by respondents to diagnose depression in psychosis.

The majority of participants reported not utilising a specific interview
system to inform a diagnosis of depression in psychosis (96.6%). In
terms of employing depression evaluation measures, 35.1% of respondents
reported using none, 39.1% used the Beck Depression Inventory, 28.5%
used the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression, 17.2% used the Brief
Psychiatric Scale and 9.3% used the Calgary Depression Scale for
Schizophrenia (CDSS).

.. _sec2-3:

Recognition and management of depression in psychosis
-----------------------------------------------------

Participants were asked about which clinical guidelines they used to aid
the recognition and management of depression in psychosis: 61.5% of
respondents used NICE guidelines, 50.0% used the Maudsley Prescribing
Guidelines, 27.6% used British Association for Psychopharmacology
guidelines and 12.0% used *BJPsych Advances* (previously known as
*Advances in Psychiatric Treatment*) articles; the remainder mainly used
clinical experience.

.. _sec2-4:

Treatment approaches
--------------------

.. _sec2-4-1:

Antidepressant therapy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The majority of respondents reported that antidepressant medication
would be their first line of treatment for psychosis with comorbid
depression (69.5%), 32.5% indicated cognitive–behavioural therapy, 12.3%
reported a ‘watch and wait approach’ and 7.4% would reduce the dose of
the prescribed antipsychotic medication.

In terms of factors that would prompt prescribing of an antidepressant,
84.2% reported a family history of depression, 40.4% reported poor
interpersonal and social skills, 39.2% reported ‘living alone’ and 29.8%
reported a ‘recent loss or rejection’. Key symptoms prompting a
prescription of an antidepressant medication included hopelessness
(80.1%), low mood (76.5%) and suicidal ideation (75.5%).

With regards to antidepressants prescribed in early psychosis with
comorbid depression, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors were
generally preferred; the majority of respondents opted for sertraline
(85.4%), followed by mirtazapine (49.8%), fluoxetine (45.4%) and
venlafaxine (33.7%). Interestingly, 28.8% of participants opted for
citalopram and 15.1% opted for escitalopram. Please see `Fig.
2 <#fig02>`__ for the proportions of antidepressants prescribed. Fig.
2Proportions of antidepressants reported to be prescribed as first-line
treatments for depression in early psychosis

.. _sec2-4-2:

Antipsychotic therapy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Participants were asked about antipsychotics they routinely prescribe
for young people with early psychosis. Atypical antipsychotic agents
were the most commonly prescribed: 66.0% of respondents opted for
aripiprazole, 54.2% opted for olanzapine, 52.2% opted for risperidone
and 44.3% opted for quetiapine. Clozapine was selected by 9.9% of
respondents. Please see `Fig. 3 <#fig03>`__ for the proportion of
antipsychotics prescribed. Fig. 3Proportions of antipsychotics
prescribed by respondents.

.. _sec2-4-3:

Drug combinations and treatment duration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In terms of conjunctive antidepressant and dopamine antagonist
prescribing, 55.7% reported they would not frequently prescribe this
combination, 35.8% reported often prescribing and 8.5% affirmed that
they very often prescribe this combination.

A total of 13.5% of respondents stated that they would completely avoid
mirtazapine and olanzapine in combination, with a handful citing reasons
such as weight gain and oversedation; 14.4% stated they would actively
avoid citalopram and antipsychotics in combination, with some citing
reasons such as increased risk of corrected QT interval prolongation;
and 42.3% reported that there were no combinations that they would
actively avoid.

With regards to duration of therapy, 47.8% of respondents estimated
expecting clinical benefits within 2–4 weeks of adding antidepressant to
dopamine antagonist therapy, 43.3% thought it would likely take 4–6
weeks and 7.5% predicted improvement in 6–12 weeks. The majority of
participants (77.5%) felt that antidepressant therapy should continue
for 6–12 months once the individual showed a satisfactory response,
15.7% felt that therapy should continue for >12 months and 8.3% felt
that therapy should continue for 3–6 months. In terms of physical health
monitoring when coprescribing, 77.9% monitored heart rhythm via
electrocardiogram, monitored blood chemistry (prolactin, glucose and
lipid profile), 73.4% monitored bloods (prolactin, glucose and lipid
profile) and 42.9% undertook a physical examination. However, 18.2%
reported that no physical health interventions were carried out.

.. _sec2-4-4:

Non-pharmacological treatment approaches
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

On average, most respondents prescribed non-pharmacological therapies
for depression in FEP, with 82.1% opting for psychoeducation and
cognitive–behavioural therapy, 67.2% opting for psychosocial
interventions and 42.3% opting for family interventions. A further 10.5%
of participants reported prescribing electroconvulsive therapy, and a
handful opted for lifestyle interventions and supportive psychotherapy.

.. _sec2-5:

Reflections from respondents
----------------------------

Overall, about a third of the participants highlighted difficulty in
delineating negative symptoms of psychosis from depression during a
period of psychosis. Others described the complex interactions of
positive and cognitive symptoms that are hard to disentangle, as well as
the possibility of an affective illness occurring as the primary driver
for psychosis. Many respondents expressed keenness in offering
psychology or psychotherapy, but cited problems with availability at the
time of need.

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

This study aimed to gauge the level of recognition and management
approaches used by UK psychiatrists to manage and treat depression in
psychosis. With depression in psychosis now being adopted in national
and international clinical guidelines,\ :sup:`7` we wanted to explore
whether any change in recognition has led to more effective management
of depression in those with psychosis, particularly in the early stages
of illness.

Overall, the majority of respondents (69.5%) indicated the use of
antidepressant medication as a first line of treatment for young people
with psychosis and comorbid depression. There was reasonable agreement
among clinicians on the contextual factors and key symptoms that would
prompt a prescription of antidepressant medication. For example, the
majority of respondents reported low mood and anhedonia as the major
symptoms for diagnosing depression (93% and 68%, respectively), with 45%
also identifying anergia as a core symptom. Over 80% of participants
reported that they would routinely prescribe a selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitor (sertraline in particular). This indicates a
reasonable agreement between clinicians on the best strategy for
managing comorbid depression with psychosis. These findings demonstrate
a possible shift in the management strategy since Siris et
al's\ :sup:`9` earlier publication, where a third of clinicians reported
that they would rarely prescribe antidepressants in adjunct to
antipsychotic medication.

Although previous studies have reported 70% prevalence rates of
depression at illness onset,\ :sup:`1` our study showed fewer
respondents (19%) identified depression as occurring frequently in FEP;
instead, 54% reported observing depression occurring with stable
psychosis. This might suggest that depression in the early phases of
psychosis is still underrecognised; this is concerning, given that young
people in particular are at heightened risk of suicide within the first
12 months following the initial episode of psychosis.\ :sup:`15,16`
However, it must also be acknowledged that the findings from our survey
are reliant on the memory of clinicians, with a potential for recall
bias, and so the accuracy of these findings may be challenged.

Despite a consensus on treatment strategies for depression, what became
apparent from the survey was the uncertainty around assessing depression
and delineating from psychosis symptoms, and particularly negative
symptoms. Interestingly, a large proportion do not employ structured
interview schedules to inform their assessment, which could aid this
delineation. In particular, the CDSS was only used by 9% of respondents.
The CDSS is a short and easily used instrument, designed specifically
for the assessment of depression in psychosis, as it distinguishes
between negative and positive symptoms.\ :sup:`17` Better promotion of
these evaluation measures may be warranted.

There were also reports of challenges faced by clinicians in determining
if the symptoms were part of an affective component of the psychotic
episode, potentially highlighting the need for a better understanding of
the diagnostic uncertainty and course of depression in early
psychosis.\ :sup:`18`

Over the past two decades, there appears to have been a shift in
prescribing of antipsychotic medications – particularly from the first
generation (typical) to second generation (atypical) agents.\ :sup:`19`
This is also reflected in our survey, where the majority were
prescribing atypical agents such as aripiprazole, olanzapine,
risperidone and quetiapine, compared with 4.9% and 3.9% of respondents
prescribing haloperidol and zuclopenthixol. Thus, there appears to be a
particular preference toward the antipsychotics believed to have the
least side-effects, but not with recognition that some antipsychotics
may have more antidepressant properties,\ :sup:`20` or possibly promote
depression, such as haloperidol.\ :sup:`13`

In regards to coprescribing in the present study, most respondents
reported that there were no combinations of antidepressants and
antipsychotics that they would actively avoid; however, some did express
actively avoiding citalopram and antipsychotic in combination, with some
citing risk of prolongation of the corrected QT interval. A similar
percentage reported they would actively avoid a combination of
mirtazapine and olanzapine because of increased risk of weight gain and
sedation. In line with this, the majority of respondents (>70%) stated
that they provided routine physical health monitoring when
coprescribing. These findings indicate that clinicians are perhaps more
cognisant of the potential physical health problems caused by
antipsychotic medications, and may suggest proactiveness in mitigating
such risks. Although this finding is encouraging, recent data shows that
only 32.3% of individuals with severe mental illness in England receive
a full physical health check.\ :sup:`21,22` Given the lowered life
expectancy of individuals with schizophrenia, the current NICE
recommendations advocate for annual physical health checks for all
individuals with severe mental health problems.\ :sup:`23` Improving
physical health monitoring should remain a top priority.\ :sup:`22`

.. _sec3-1:

Implications for clinical practice
----------------------------------

Our results may indicate further training and embedding of routine
assessment tools into clinical practice is be needed to further increase
the recognition and management of depression, which, if achieved, could
improve outcomes. Indeed, this finding is in keeping with the wider
literature on the difficulty of promoting the use of instruments, such
as the CDSS, into routine practice.\ :sup:`24` A suggestion may be to
embed these instruments into electronic patient records, and include
monitoring of comorbidities as part of quality improvement programmes,
and national audits such as the National Clinical Audit of
Psychosis.\ :sup:`25`

.. _sec3-2:

Study strengths and limitations
-------------------------------

This study was the first to explore clinician recognition and management
of depression in young people with FEP. Although the survey was
completed by 297 clinicians, responses were underrepresented in certain
parts of the country (particularly Wales, Northern Ireland and East
Midlands), and overall response rate was low. On average, a third of the
participants who completed the survey also returned incomplete
questionnaires, affecting the overall representativeness of the
information provided.

This study relied on the clinician reflecting on their previous
practice, awareness and general approach, and they were provided with
multiple options for each question. As such, there is a potential for
recall bias. Furthermore, some questions were focused on depression
within psychosis more generally, meaning that responses were less
specific to depression in FEP. It is also very likely that clinicians
within the Early Intervention Service and those with more interest in
this field may have been more involved in the survey. An Amazon voucher
was also offered as an incentive for participation, again, further
introducing a respondent bias.

Another limitation was in disseminating the survey. Because of
regulations governing the Royal College of Psychiatry, emails were only
distributed to members registered under the General Adult Psychiatry
faculty. The questionnaire was not disseminated to other psychiatric
disciplines that may have been relevant, such as Child and Adolescent
Mental Health Service, and Forensic or Learning Disability
subspecialties. Finally, the survey was UK-based, with a low response
rate. Further research is required to understand whether these practices
are uniform in a larger sample of participants, and across different
countries, particularly in the USA and Europe.

In conclusion, although there is now more consensus on recognising
depression in early psychosis strategies, there continues to be
variations in the approach toward its assessment and management (e.g. in
the use of specific interview schedules or evaluation measures to assess
depression in those with psychosis). Although our findings are
tentative, given the low response rate, the survey indicates that
adjunctive treatment is being administered by most clinicians; however,
some expressed difficulties in differentiating between depression
occurring in relation to psychosis and negative symptoms of psychosis,
and there was little consensus on treatment duration and time of
expectation of response. Embedding of structured assessment tools into
routine practice, in addition to devising clearer national guidelines
based on large definitive trials, would be instrumental in improving
future practice in early psychosis, potentially leading to improved
outcomes.

We thank the Royal College of Psychiatrists for supporting our research
by distributing our study information to its members. We also thank the
clinicians who took time to participate in this study.

**Zainab Bashir** (MBBS, MSc, MRCPsych) is an ST5 Psychiatry Registrar
at the Psychiatric Intensive Care Unit, Birmingham and Solihull Mental
Health Foundation Trust, UK. **Sian Lowri Griffiths** (PhD) is a
Research Fellow at theInstitute for Mental Health, University of
Birmingham, UK. **Rachel Upthegrove** (MBBS, FRCPsych, PhD) is a
Professor at the Institute for Mental Health, University of Birmingham,
UK; and a Consultant Psychiatrist at the Birmingham Early Intervention
Service, Birmingham Women's and Children's NHS Foundation Trust, UK.

.. _sec-das:

Data availability
=================

The corresponding and senior authors had full access to study data and
had final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication. The
data that support the findings of this study are available on request
from the corresponding author, S.L.G. The data are not publicly
available due to privacy or ethical restrictions.

R.U. was the chief investigator and funds recipient. S.L.G. and Z.B.
designed the study protocol and survey. The data were analysed by Z.B.
and S.L.G. Z.B. and S.L.G. drafted the manuscript, with further input
from R.U. All authors provided comments on the manuscripts and approved
the final version.

.. _nts5:

Declaration of interest
=======================

R.U. reports grants from Medical Research Council, the National
Institute for Health Research's Health Technology Assessment and the
European Commission's Seventh Framework Programme, and personal fees
from Sunovion, outside the submitted work.

.. _sec4:

Supplementary material
----------------------

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2021.15.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material
