=================================================================================
Adverse childhood experiences and adult self-harm in a female forensic population
=================================================================================



Rachel Holden
Imogen Stables
Penelope Brown
Maria Fotiadou
:Correspondence: Dr Rachel Holden
(rachel.holden@kcl.ac.uk) [1]_

:date: 2022-06

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   This study aimed to investigate the prevalence of adverse childhood
   experiences (ACEs) among patients in a female forensic psychiatric
   in-patient medium-secure unit, and to analyse the link between ACEs,
   adulthood self-harm and associated comorbidities and risk factors.
   The study used a cross-sectional design, with data gathered from the
   anonymised electronic health records of patients.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   It was found that there was a high prevalence of both ACEs and
   self-harm among this patient group, and that there was a relationship
   between the two; those with more ACEs were more likely to have
   self-harmed during adulthood. Of the individual ACE categories, it
   was also demonstrated that emotional abuse had a significant
   association with adulthood self-harm.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   In medium-secure settings for women, implementation of
   trauma-informed care will be beneficial because of the high number of
   those with mental disorders who have experienced adversity during
   their childhood.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Adverse childhood experiences (ACEs) are stressful or traumatic life
events that occur before 18 years of age.\ :sup:`1,2` Having a history
of ACEs is not uncommon: in a national household survey of adults
residing in England, 47% of participants reported at least one
ACE.\ :sup:`3` Research on ACEs has demonstrated links between ACEs and
self-harm.\ :sup:`4` In a female prison population, all types of
childhood abuse and neglect were more prevalent in those who self-harmed
compared with those who did not, with significant associations between
adulthood self-harm and both childhood emotional and sexual
abuse.\ :sup:`5` ACEs have a cumulative effect on health outcomes, with
higher numbers of ACEs predicting more adverse health
outcomes.\ :sup:`6`

This study occurred on Spring Ward, the female ward of River House
Medium Secure Unit (MSU) in South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation
Trust. Since opening in April 2008, the ward has offered a
multidisciplinary biopsychosocial approach to support women toward
recovery and reintegration into the community.\ :sup:`7` In 2017,
following the success of implementing the Healing Trauma programme (a
gender-specific intervention for trauma victims),\ :sup:`8` a
trauma-informed care approach was introduced. Implementation involved
team consultation, presentation and a training session on Stephanie
Covington's Becoming Trauma-Informed Programme.\ :sup:`9`

This study was conducted as part of a service evaluation to determine
the prevalence of ACEs in a female MSU cohort and to explore the
relationship between ACEs and adulthood self-harm. Links between ACEs
and adulthood self-harming behaviours, violence and comorbidities (such
as personality disorder) will be explored, which will enable us to
better understand the present and future needs of patients.

.. _sec1-1:

Aims
====

Our first aim was to establish the prevalence of ACEs in patients in a
female MSU, using a structured ACE questionnaire. Second, we aimed to
establish the prevalence of adulthood self-harm, personality disorder,
alcohol and drug misuse, and history of violence among female
in-patients in the MSU. And finally, we aimed to explore the
relationship between ACEs and adulthood self-harm.

.. _sec2:

Method
======

.. _sec2-1:

Design and procedure
--------------------

The main study utilised a cross-sectional design, using medical records.
The researchers conducted a thorough review of each patient's electronic
medical records. Using previously recorded information, the amount of
ACEs were calculated by the researcher, based upon the trauma history
recorded in the patients records.

.. _sec2-2:

Participants
------------

All patients who were admitted to or were receiving continuing treatment
on the ward between April 2008 and July 2019 were considered eligible
for participation in this study. Criteria for admission to the ward
include being over 18 years of age, committing an offence or having a
significant history of violence. All patients are sectioned under the
Mental Health Act 1983 (MHA) throughout their admission. The ward can
accommodate 15 patients. Because of the relapsing and remitting nature
of the mental disorders of many patients, several patients had multiple
admissions during the study period; for these patients, data was
gathered from medical records documented during their most recent
admission.

Initially, 68 participants were included in the sample. Two participants
were excluded from the analysis because of insufficient information in
their medical records regarding their childhood, taking the final sample
to 66 participants. Demographic and clinical information included age on
admission, ethnicity, primary diagnosis, MHA section, personality
disorder, alcohol and drug misuse, and violence history. Ethnicity was
recorded into subsections: White British, Black British, Black African,
Black Caribbean, Asian and other. Primary diagnosis was recorded into
three categories, according to the ICD-10: schizophrenia spectrum
disorders (codes F20–F29), mood [affective] disorders (codes F30–F39)
and personality disorders (codes F60–F69).\ :sup:`10` MHA sections of
all patients were recorded into categories: forensic (section 37,
sections 37 and 41, sections 47 and 49, and sections 48 and 49) and
civil (section 3).\ :sup:`11`

.. _sec2-3:

Data collection and analysis
----------------------------

Exposure to adverse experiences up to 18 years of age was assessed for
each participant, following a thorough review of their medical notes;
ACE history was summarised by a ten-item version of the Adverse
Childhood Experiences Questionnaire.\ :sup:`12` The ACE questionnaire
consists of ten binary (yes/no) questions that assess exposure to
emotional, physical and sexual abuse; emotional and physical neglect;
and household dysfunction, including domestic violence, substance use
and incarceration. Participants’ self-harm history since 18 years of age
was obtained via medical records, along with comorbid personality
disorder, alcohol and drug misuse, and history of violence. Self-harm
was coded as a binary variable, with the presence of self-harm being
recorded if there was any mention of self-harm or suicide attempt in
adulthood mentioned in the medical records. ACEs were extracted from
records of patients’ trauma history recorded in psychological and
psychiatric reports contained in their medical records. Personality
disorder presence was defined as a previous diagnosis of any type of
personality disorder. Alcohol and drug misuse were defined as any
positive history of problematic use of alcohol or drugs. History of
violence was defined as any violence history before the event leading to
admission. Each of these variables were recorded as dichotomous (yes/no)
variables.

Data was analysed with the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (IBM
SPSS, version 25 for Mac).

.. _sec2-4:

Ethical approval
----------------

Ethical approval was granted by the Research, Outcomes and Service
Evaluation Committee, a branch of the Behavioural and Developmental
Psychiatry Clinical Academic Group of South London and Maudsley NHS
Foundation Trust. The ethical approval included the use of anonymised
medical records. This was a service development project using historic
clinical records and as such the study was exempt from a need to provide
informed consent.

.. _sec3:

Results
=======

Patients were aged between 18 and 72 years at admission (`Table
1 <#tab01>`__). The sample was primarily Black and minority ethnic, and
most patients had a primary diagnosis of schizophrenia, schizotypal and
delusional disorders (ICD-10 codes F20–F29).\ :sup:`10` The majority of
the sample had a history of drug misuse. Over a third of the sample had
a history of alcohol misuse, and over a quarter had a comorbid
personality disorder diagnosis. Table 1Demographic and clinical
characteristics of the patient sampleCharacteristicCases (*N* = 66)Age
at admission (years), mean (s.d.)38.40 (±11.37)Age categories (years),
*n* (%)<2510 (15.2)25–3413 (19.7)35–4426 (39.3)45–5412 (18.2)≥555
(7.6)Ethnicity, *n* (%)White British20 (30.3)Black British13 (19.7)Black
African13 (19.7)Black Caribbean10 (15.2)Asian2 (3.0)Other8 (12.1)Primary
diagnosis, *n* (%)F20–F29, Schizophrenia, schizotypal and delusional
disorders57 (86.4)F30–F39, Mood [affective] disorders4 (6.1)F60–F69,
Disorders of adult personality and behaviour5 (7.6)Comorbid personality
disorder, *n* (%)20 (30.3)Alcohol misuse, *n* (%)25 (37.9)Drug misuse,
*n* (%)34 (51.5)

.. _sec3-1:

Number and prevalence of ACEs
-----------------------------

In the total sample, the mean number of ACEs was 2.89 (±2.35) (`Table
2 <#tab02>`__), with ACE number showing a positively skewed
distribution. Within the sample, most individuals (*n* = 54, 81.9%) had
experienced at least one ACE during childhood; of the total sample,
28.8% had experienced two to three ACEs and 37.9% had experienced four
or more ACEs. Among the ACE categories, emotional and physical abuse
were the most common, and the rarest ACE was incarceration of household
members (`Table 2 <#tab02>`__). Table 2Main study prevalence of number
of ACEs and each category of ACECases, *N* = 66Number of ACEs, mean
(s.d.)2.89 (2.35)Number of ACEs, *n* (%)012 (18.2)110 (15.2)214 (21.2)35
(7.6)46 (9.1)57 (10.6)67 (10.6)74 (6.1)80 (0.0)91 (1.5)100 (0.0)ACE, *n*
(%)Emotional abuse27 (40.9)Physical abuse27 (40.9)Sexual abuse20
(30.3)Emotional neglect26 (39.4)Physical neglect20 (30.3)Parental
separation or divorce26 (39.4)Violence against mother8 (12.1)Household
alcohol/drug misuse13 (19.7)Mental illness in household21
(31.8)Incarceration of household member2 (3.0) [2]_

.. _sec3-2:

Number of ACEs and adulthood self-harm
--------------------------------------

Adulthood self-harm in the sample was analysed. It was determined that
over half of the sample had self-harmed during adulthood (*n* = 36,
54.5%). Because of the positive skewed nature of the number of ACEs, we
ran a Spearman's correlation to assess the relationship between number
of ACEs and adulthood self-harm on the total sample of 66 patients.
There was a statistically significant positive correlation between
number of ACEs and adulthood self-harm (*r*\ :sub:`s`\ (64) = 0.45,
*P* < 0.001). Following this, binary logistic regression was performed
to ascertain the effect of increasing number of ACEs on the likelihood
of adulthood self-harm. The binary logistic regression model was
statistically significant (*χ*\ :sup:`2`\ (1) = 15.11, *P* < 0.005). The
model explained 27.4% (Nagelkerke *R*\ :sup:`2`) of the variance in
adulthood self-harm, and correctly classified 75.7% of cases
(specificity 83.3%, sensitivity 69.4%). For every one-point increase in
number of ACEs, individuals were 1.62 times more likely to self-harm as
adults.

.. _sec3-3:

ACE categories and adulthood self-harm
--------------------------------------

We conducted an analysis to determine whether there was any association
between individual ACE categories and adulthood self-harm. The total
sample who had self-harmed during adulthood was analysed to determine
the prevalence of each type of ACE within this category. In those who
had self-harmed during adulthood, emotional abuse was the most common
ACE (*n* = 22, 33.3%), followed by physical abuse (*n* = 19, 28.8%),
emotional neglect (*n* = 19, 28.8%) and physical neglect (*n* = 17,
25.8%). Estimates of the odds ratio for each of the ten ACEs ranged from
1.38 (95% CI 0.47–3.99) for sexual abuse to 8.05 (95% CI 2.07–31.39) for
physical neglect. However, statistically significant associations with
adulthood self-harm were only seen for emotional abuse, physical abuse,
emotional neglect and physical neglect. These relationships were then
further explored by Pearson's *χ*\ :sup:`2`-tests and Fisher's exact
tests, which confirmed that four categories of ACE had a statistically
significant association with adulthood self-harm: emotional abuse
(*χ*\ :sup:`2`\ (1) = 13.37, *P* < 0.001), physical abuse
(*χ*\ :sup:`2`\ (1) = 4.62, *P* = 0.032), emotional neglect
(*χ*\ :sup:`2`\ (1) = 5.94), *P* = 0.015) and physical neglect
(*P* = 0.001, Fisher's exact test, two-sided).

Multivariate binary logistic regression was conducted to determine
whether emotional abuse, physical abuse, emotional neglect and physical
neglect maintained their statistically significant association with
adulthood self-harm when all four categories were accounted for. In this
model, 31.2% (Nagelkerke *R*\ :sup:`2`) of the variation in adulthood
self-harm was explained by these four ACE categories. This model
correctly classified 71.2% of cases (specificity 80.0%, sensitivity
63.9%). When accounting for emotional abuse, physical abuse, emotional
neglect and physical neglect, only emotional abuse maintained a
statistically significant relationship with adulthood self-harm
(*P* = 0.034), showing that being emotionally abused increased the
likelihood of adulthood self-harm by 7.36 times (`Table 3 <#tab03>`__).
Table 3Multivariate binary logistic regression to analyse the
association between emotional abuse, physical abuse, emotional neglect
and physical neglect, and adulthood
self-harmVariables\ *B*\ s.e.Waldd.f.SignificanceExp(*B*)95% CI for
Exp(*B*)LowerUpperStep 1Emotional
abuse1.9970.9444.47710.0347.3641.15846.805Physical
abuse−0.5070.9050.31410.5750.6020.1023.549Emotional
neglect−0.9651.1160.74810.3870.3810.0433.395Physical
neglect1.9271.1382.86810.0906.8680.73963.859 [3]_

.. _sec4:

Discussion
==========

This study was the first to analyse the prevalence of ACEs, adulthood
self-harm and their relationship in a female MSU population in the UK.
Multivariate binary logistic regression revealed a statistically
significant association between an increasing number of ACEs and
increased likelihood of adulthood-self harm. Emotional abuse was shown
to have a statistically significant association with adulthood
self-harm.

We found a high prevalence of ACE exposure in this female MSU cohort,
with over 80% of individuals experiencing at least one ACE and 56%
experiencing more than two ACEs. The prevalence of ACE exposure among
this female MSU group was higher than the 47% prevalence in the general
adult population of the UK.\ :sup:`3`

Within this population, there was a high prevalence of adulthood
self-harm. Adulthood self-harm in our sample was reported by 54.5%,
similar to the rates reported by Ribeiro et al\ :sup:`13` (whose MSU
population overlapped with ours), who found that 46.7% had a documented
history of self-harm before MSU admission. Baker et al\ :sup:`14`
interviewed female patients in a medium-secure setting and discussed
their experiences of self-harm; an overarching theme discussed was that
of ‘the traumatised individual’, suggesting that individuals linking
their traumatic experiences to self-harming behaviour is not uncommon.
The high prevalence of ACEs amongst the female MSU population indicates
that a trauma-informed approach to care in MSU settings for women is
crucial. Application of ‘universal trauma precautions’ is necessary, to
ensure that all who have been exposed to ACEs receive care that is not
only growth-promoting, but also less likely to cause re-traumatisation
than standard care.\ :sup:`15`

We found a statistically significant correlation between an increasing
number of ACEs and the likelihood of adulthood self-harm. This is
similar to research by Cleare et al,\ :sup:`16` showing that those with
a history of repeat self-harm were significantly more likely to report
exposure to multiple ACEs. Moreover, our finding of a statistically
significant relationship between emotional abuse and adulthood self-harm
supports the research by Howard et al,\ :sup:`5` who found a
statistically significant association between emotional abuse and
self-harm in a sample of female prisoners.

It was advantageous to focus on those admitted to a single female MSU
over the past 11 years, as there is limited data regarding this
population. Use of electronic medical records to obtain data meant
minimal information was missing and there was low attrition. In this
niche population, we achieved a good sample size; only around 12% of the
3500 MSU beds in the UK are occupied by women.\ :sup:`17`

The ACE questionnaire is limited as it provides no information regarding
the severity, degree, duration, timing or quality of each ACE component,
which may differ significantly from person to person. Furthermore, data
collected about self-harm behaviours could have been improved by using
the Inventory of Statements about Self-Injury questionnaire,\ :sup:`18`
examining the type, frequency, severity and reasons for the behaviour.
Further research could focus on collecting more in-depth childhood
histories from patients, or using self-harm measures that capture
frequency and severity.

Limited research is also available in forensic psychiatric settings,
specifically MSUs, and nationwide research into ACEs and self-harm
within these units could be beneficial. Furthermore, the
neurodevelopmental and psychological mechanisms by which ACEs and
self-harm are linked need exploration.

**Rachel Holden** is a clinical psychologist at South London and
Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, UK, and a Clinical Psychologist Lecturer
with the Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience at King's
College London, UK. **Imogen Stables** is a Medical Student at GKT
School of Medical Education, King's College London, UK. **Penelope
Brown** is a Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist at South London and
Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Maria Fotiadou** is a Consultant
Forensic Psychiatrist South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust,
UK.

.. _sec-das1:

Data availability
=================

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding author, R.H., upon reasonable request.

I.S. was involved in data collection, data analysis and writing of the
manuscript. R.H., P.B. and M.F. contributed to writing the manuscript.

.. _nts4:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. [1]
   Joint first authors.

.. [2]
   Within the sample, two was the most common amount of ACEs (56% of the
   sample experienced two or more ACEs) and emotional and physical abuse
   were the most common ACE categories. ACE, adverse childhood
   experience.

.. [3]
   This multivariate binary logistic regression model included all
   adverse childhood experience categories that were individually
   significantly associated with adulthood self-harm. It was run to
   determine whether statistical significance was maintained when all
   the categories were accounted for; only emotional abuse remained
   significantly associated with adulthood self-harm.
