.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
This second edition book reviews significant changes to the Mental
Capacity Act (MCA) and readily accomplishes its aim to help clinicians
in their daily practice. It is a short book of seven chapters and 120
pages and is written in an engaging style, being expertly presented with
the use of sub-headings and crafted case studies, and avoiding large
tracts of boring text.

Although all chapters are pertinent, the chapters on assessment of
capacity and best interests stand out. Sage advice and clarity in
breaking down the constituents of the capacity assessment elucidate the
intricacies of assessing capacity that can be taken for granted at times
in the hurly burly of clinical work. The best interests chapter updates
the reader on the plethora of Court of Protection case law that has
emerged and how the person's wishes have become central to the process.

An overview of Deprivation of Liberty Safeguards (DOLS) describes how
issues with their use nationally provoked their reform and the
subsequent development of Liberty Protection Safeguards (LPS), due to
take the place of DOLS in autumn 2020. The chapter reviewing LPS
provides a great starting point for understanding their practical use,
although we await the associated Code of Practice to further flesh this
out. Helpful chapters specifically address MCA use in the acute hospital
(cleverly based on one sequential case study looking at realistic
scenarios) and social care settings. My favourite chapter was the final
one, which considers clinical ambiguities in the assessment of capacity
which can often be clinically vexing, e.g. patient ambivalence,
fluctuating capacity, unusual values/belief systems, self-harm, and
consent and refusal of treatment.

This is a book for the jobbing clinician of all specialties, not just
mental health. It provides a succinct yet comprehensive review that all
healthcare professionals can benefit from. For students – both medical
and nursing – this should be a required text. My only suggested
improvement would have been to include a section on how the reader can
access online MCA resources to help them keep abreast of developments. I
hope the learned authors of this book continue to provide future
editions as MCA case law evolves, including the inevitable future
emergent case law, à la DOLS, from the introduction of LPS.
