=================
Response to Beale
=================

:Author: A. Z. FRCPsych
:Author: B. Z. FRCPsych
:Date: 2022-06

pmc
We write to add our personal experience of 30 years of consultant
psychiatric practice and of having a son with a long history of serious
psychiatric problems to endorse Chloe Beale's powerful indictment of
current mental health service failures. Having found our son in his room
2 weeks ago attempting to hang himself, we called 999. The ambulance
arrived within a few minutes; he sat for 9 hours in the ambulance
outside A&E before being seen by a series of three mental health nurses
with questionnaires and was then summarily sent to walk home, still
actively suicidal, past a famous ‘suicide spot’. We were not informed
that he had been discharged. We had rung to ask what was happening and
were summarily dismissed by one of the nurses with the cryptic comment
that he had been ‘signposted to the Road’ (apparently a counselling
charity). This actually meant he was given some leaflets. Thankfully he
had enough wish to live to ring us after a cold walk and we provided
such support as we are able, as we have for several years.

He had therefore been put through exactly the process of checklist
assessment, meaningless non-intervention of ‘weasel words’, legalised
neglect, and dangerous and unfair self-guarantee of safety that is
described by Beale. This useless approach has therefore, of course, made
both him and us feel there is no point in contacting the service again,
nor of suggesting anyone else do so.

As doctors and psychiatrists, it has always been our training and
teaching that the person/patient was our prime concern, but this is
clearly no longer the case. Protection of the system from the rightful
needs of patients is the current priority in psychiatric services. The
amount of energy and time put into that process now is almost
unbelievable and extremely damaging, not only to patients and their
families. It is an example of the stigmatisation and dismissal of
psychiatric problems, even by staff working in the specialism, that is
returning psychiatry to the hopeless laughing stock that it had been
before the last war and which we and our teachers and colleagues had
done so much to try to turn into a valued and respected medical
specialism. Only the sort of fundamental re-humanisation and recovery of
professional standards of treatment set out by Beale in her last
paragraphs can return psychiatry to self-respect and our patients to
proper care.

Beale's paper should be required, albeit uncomfortable reading for all
involved in psychiatric care (‘mental health’ are two more weasel words
which demean psychiatric illness). Let us hope that Beale's call to arms
is heeded for the sake of our patients.

.. _nts1:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None
