==========================================================================================================================================================================================
Examining the effects of national initiatives to improve the physical health of people with psychosis in England: secondary analysis of data from the National Clinical Audit of Psychosis
==========================================================================================================================================================================================



Ryan Williams
Sagana Natkulasingam
Beatrice Tooke
Ella Webster
Alan Quirk
Veenu Gupta
Paul French
Jo Smith
Mike J. Crawford
:Correspondence: Ryan Williams (ryan.williams2@nhs.net)

:date: 2022-06

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and Methods
      :name: sec_a2

   To examine whether national initiatives have led to improvements in
   the physical health of people with psychosis. Secondary analysis of a
   national audit of services for people with psychosis. Proportions of
   patients in ‘good health’ according to seven measures, and one
   composite measure derived from national standards, were compared
   between multiple rounds of data collection.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a4

   The proportion of patients in overall ‘good health’ under the care of
   ‘Early Intervention in Psychosis’ teams increased from 2014–2019,
   particularly for measures of smoking, alcohol and substance use.
   There was no overall change in the proportion of patients in overall
   ‘good health’ under the care of ‘Community Mental Health Teams’ from
   2011–2017. However, there were improvements in alcohol use, blood
   glucose and lipid levels.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a5

   There have been modest improvements in the health of people with
   psychosis over the last nine years. Continuing efforts are required
   to translate these improvements into reductions in premature
   mortality.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Concerns have repeatedly been raised regarding premature mortality among
people with schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders.\ :sup:`1–6`
People who experience psychosis die on average 10–20 years earlier than
the general population.\ :sup:`7,8`

Factors contributing to this inequality may include economic
disadvantage, health risk behaviours and difficulties accessing and
adhering to medical treatments.\ :sup:`9–11` These frequently translate
to poor physical health, and psychotic disorders are strongly associated
with unfavourable outcomes for a range of physical health measures:
smoking status, weight, serum glucose levels, blood pressure and serum
lipids.\ :sup:`12,13` These issues can be compounded by metabolic
side-effects of antipsychotic medication,\ :sup:`14–17` and an increased
risk of cardiovascular disease is widely accepted as the primary
mediator of reduced life expectancy.\ :sup:`4,18–20`

.. _sec1-2:

National initiatives
====================

In 2014, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE)
produced recommendations to guide screening and intervention for common
physical health problems experienced by people with
psychosis.\ :sup:`21` The same year, NHS England announced a new
Commissioning for Quality and Innovation (CQUIN) framework, providing
financial incentives for physical health screening and interventions
within secondary mental health services.\ :sup:`22` The ‘Positive
Cardiometabolic Health Resource’ was published, with support from the
Royal Colleges of Psychiatrists, Physicians, Nursing and General
Practice, establishing a user-friendly manual for clinicians providing
care to patients with severe mental illness.\ :sup:`23`

Since these initiatives were implemented, there is some evidence that
the quality of physical healthcare delivered to patients with psychosis
has improved.\ :sup:`24` However, there are ongoing concerns that this
has not translated to an improvement in patients’ health. A recent study
found that cardiometabolic risk factors were already pronounced in those
presenting to services with a first episode of psychotic illness, and
that physical health deteriorated during the first year of
treatment.\ :sup:`25`

In light of these apparent contradictions, we aimed to investigate
whether physical health has improved among people with psychotic
disorders. We conducted a secondary analysis of data gathered over the
past 9 years, during national audits of services for people with
psychosis.

.. _sec2:

Method
======

All data for this study were collected during two audit rounds conducted
as part of the National Clinical Audit of Psychosis (NCAP) by the Royal
College of Psychiatrists.\ :sup:`26` Both examined services providing
care to people with psychotic disorders in England. A ‘core’ audit
generated data on people under the care of community mental health teams
(CMHTs), with three rounds of data collection in 2011, 2013 and 2017. A
‘spotlight’ audit collected additional data on the quality of care
received by people with first-episode psychosis (FEP) who received care
from early intervention for psychosis (EIP) teams. Three rounds of the
spotlight audit were conducted in 2014, 2018 and 2019. All National
Health Service (NHS) Provider Trusts in England with CMHTs and EIP teams
that provided care to patients with psychotic disorders were invited to
take part in these respective audits.

For both audits, all participating organisations were asked to provide
an anonymised list of eligible patients who fulfilled inclusion criteria
during a 12-month ‘sampling window’ before the point of data collection.
From each list, 100 patients were randomly selected for inclusion in the
audit. For the CMHT audit, patients were eligible for inclusion if they
had an active period of care with a participating CMHT, were aged ≥18
years and had an established diagnosis of schizophrenia or
schizoaffective disorder (ICD-10 codes F20/F25) recorded during the
12-month sampling period. Patients were excluded if they had received
in-patient care or care from an EIP team during this period. For the EIP
audit, patients were eligible for inclusion if they had an active period
of care with a participating EIP team, were aged ≥14 years and had a
diagnosed ‘first episode’ of any psychotic disorder (ICD-10 codes
F20-F29) recorded during the 12-month sampling period. For the purposes
of this study, we excluded any patients whose host organisation did not
participate in all three rounds of the respective audit.

For both audits, staff from each organisation were asked to conduct a
retrospective review of case notes from the sampling window, and extract
data to complete an online data collection tool. The tool included
questions on physical health measures, quantifying patients’ smoking
status, alcohol use, blood pressure, body mass index (BMI), serum
glucose, serum lipids and whether they were known to use illicit
substances. The data collection tools for both audits were based on NICE
guidance for management of psychotic disorders.\ :sup:`21` They were
developed in collaboration with patients and providers of psychiatric
services, and carer representatives with lived experience of supporting
patients with psychotic disorders. The tool was piloted by six volunteer
trusts before the main audit, to ensure that the process was
understandable and acceptable.

During the development of this project, the National Research Ethics
Service and the Ethics and Confidentiality Committee of the National
Information Governance Board advised that formal ethical approval and
individual participants' informed consent were not required because this
was a secondary analysis of audit data and patient-identifiable data
were not being collected. The authors assert that all procedures
contributing to this work comply with the ethical standards of the
relevant national and institutional committees on human experimentation
and with the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as revised in 2008.

.. _sec2-1:

Exposure, outcome measures and covariates
-----------------------------------------

The primary outcome measures for this study were whether patients were
considered to be in ‘good health’, according to for seven discrete
physical health measures and one composite measure. The seven measures
of good health were smoking status (not currently smoking, e.g.
non-smoker or ex-smoker), alcohol use (no recorded ‘harmful or
hazardous’ alcohol use), illicit substance use (no recorded illicit
substance use), blood pressure (normotensive, i.e. <140/90 mmHg), BMI
(within normal range, i.e. 18.5–24.9), serum glucose (within normal
range, i.e. fasting blood glucose <5.5 mmol/L and/or random plasma
glucose <11.1 mmol/L and/or hemoglobin A1C <42 mmol/mol) and serum
lipids (within normal range, i.e. total serum cholesterol <5.1 mmol/L
and/or high-density lipoprotein >1 mmol/L and/or non-high-density
lipoprotein <4.1 mmol/L). The definition of good health for each measure
was based on the standards implemented by the national Mental Health
Commissioning for Quality and Innovation analysis.\ :sup:`22` To be
considered in good health for the composite measure, patients had to
fulfil the criteria for good health for all of the seven discrete
measures.

In addition, patients’ age and gender were recorded, to provide
demographic information about the overall sample for each audit.

.. _sec2-2:

Statistical methods
-------------------

We used SPSS (version 26 for Windows)\ :sup:`27` to analyse the study
data. For each round of the audits, the proportion of patients with good
health were calculated for each of the physical health measures and the
composite measure. The variation in these proportions between each round
of the two audits was then examined with binomial logistic regression.

Variation in demographic characteristics (age and gender) were compared
between the CMHT and EIP audits, using *t*- and *χ*\ :sup:`2`-tests,
respectively.

For many patients, data were not recorded for some of the physical
health measures (presumably because it was not available in the clinical
records, possibly because of patients refusing to undergo investigation
or provide information).\ :sup:`28` Missing values were not included in
the analysis.

.. _sec3:

Results
=======

For the CMHT audit, 57 NHS Provider Trusts submitted data for all three
rounds. Data from 16 752 sets of case notes were analysed (4618 from the
first round in 2011, 4785 from the second round in 2013 and 7349 from
the third round in 2017). For the EIP audit, 54 NHS Provider Trusts
submitted data for all three rounds. Data from 20 611 sets of case notes
were analysed (2158 from the first round in 2014, 8768 from the second
round in 2018 and 9685 from the third round in 2019).

`Table 1 <#tab01>`__ summarises the demographic characteristics (age and
gender) for the total samples of the CMHT audit and EIP audit,
respectively. Across the three rounds, patients in the CMHT audit were
significantly older than those in the EIP audit, with mean ages of 47.11
years and 29.66 years, respectively (*t*\ (37 361) = 156.94,
*P* < 0.001). In the CMHT audit, 65.6% of the total sample were men,
compared with 64.2% in the EIP audit, which was not a statistically
significant difference. Table 1Demographic characteristics of people
with psychosis in the CMHT and EIP auditsCMHT auditEIP auditAge, mean
(s.d.)47.11 (±12.02)29.66 (±9.47)Difference in age between audits was
statistically significant as determined by *t*-test:
*t*\ (37361) = 156.94, *P* < 0.001Gender, *n* (%)Male10 989 (65.6)13 232
(64.2)Female5763 (34.4)7379 (35.8)Difference in gender between audits
was not statistically significant as determined by *χ*\ :sup:`2`-test:
*χ*\ :sup:`2` = 1.23, *P* = 0.267 [1]_

`Table 2 <#tab02>`__ summarises the proportion of CMHT patients in good
health according to each of our outcome measures (including the
composite measure), and the variation in these proportions over time
across the three rounds of the CMHT audit. There were variable amounts
of missing data for each of the seven outcome measures, meaning that the
composite measure could only be used for 31.3% (5243/16 752) of CMHT
patients. Table 2Proportion of people with psychosis with good health
outcomes at each round of the community mental health team audit2011
Audit2013 Audit2017 Audit\ *n/Nn/Nn/N*\ %%%Odds ratio (95% CI),
*P*-valueOdds ratio (95% CI), *P*-valueOdds ratio (95% CI),
*P*-valueSmoking1694/40161769/42862784/634242.241.343.9Reference0.97
(0.89–1.06), 0.5661.07 (0.99–1.16), 0.090Alcohol
use2691/31972887/33875686/641084.285.288.7Reference1.09 (0.95–1.24),
0.2441.48 (1.31–1.67), <0.001Illicit substance
use3377/38883699/42435281/633286.987.283.4Reference1.03 (0.90–1.17),
0.6890.76 (0.68–0.85), <0.001Body mass
index502/1202571/2587992/453722.822.121.9Reference0.96 (0.84–1.10),
0.5720.95 (0.84–1.07), 0.406Blood
pressure1900/25932191/29463642/485573.374.475.0Reference1.06
(0.94–1.19), 0.3711.10 (0.98–1.22), 0.107Blood glucose
levels1449/22971502/26903393/433263.155.878.3Reference0.74 (0.66–0.83),
<0.0012.12 (1.89–2.36), <0.001Blood
lipids924/21861143/30022350/415242.342.356.6Reference1.00 (0.89–1.12),
0.9981.78 (1.60–1.98), <0.001Composite
measure33/100434/137276/28673.32.52.7Reference0.74 (0.46–1.22),
0.2940.80 (0.53–1.21), 0.348

There was some evidence of improvement in health. CMHT patients in the
third round were significantly more likely than those in the first round
to be in good health according to measures of alcohol use (odds ratio
1.48, 95% CI 1.31–1.67, *P* ≤ 0.001), blood glucose levels (odds ratio
2.12, 95% CI 1.89–2.36, *P* < 0.001) and blood lipids (odds ratio 1.78,
95% CI 1.60–1.98, *P* < 0.001).

However, CMHT patients in the third round were less likely to be in good
health for the illicit substance use measure (odds ratio 0.76, 95% CI
0.68–0.85, *P* < 0.001), i.e. a higher proportion of CMHT patients were
using illicit substances in 2017 compared with 2011. The proportion of
CMHT patients in overall good health according to the composite measure
was consistently low across all three rounds of the audit, and decreased
from 3.3% in 2011 to 2.7% in 2017, although this was not statistically
significant.

`Table 3 <#tab03>`__ summarises the proportion of EIP patients in good
health according to each of our outcome measures (and the composite
measure), and the variation in these proportions over time across the
three rounds of the EIP audit. Similarly, there were variable amounts of
missing data for each of the seven outcome measures, meaning that the
composite measure could only be used for 56.4% (11 625/20 611) of EIP
patients. Table 3Proportion of people with psychosis with good health
outcomes at each round of the audit of early intervention in psychosis
services2014 Audit2018 Audit2019 Audit\ *n/Nn/Nn/N*\ %%%Odds ratio (95%
CI), *P*-valueOdds ratio (95% CI), *P*-valueOdds ratio (95% CI),
*P*-valueSmoking885/18084015/78324581/848749.051.354.0Reference1.10
(0.99–1.22), 0.0801.22 (1.11–1.35), <0.001Alcohol
use1620/18537021/77747749/852687.490.390.9Reference1.34 (1.15–1.57),
<0.0011.43 (1.23–1.68), <0.001Illicit substance
use1182/19055711/78316410/851762.172.975.3Reference1.65 (1.48–1.83),
<0.0011.86 (1.68–2.07), <0.001Body mass
index460/10442314/66672662/756644.134.735.2Reference0.68 (0.59–0.77),
<0.0010.69 (0.60–0.79), <0.001Blood
pressure924/11065513/67336314/775083.581.981.5Reference0.89 (0.75–1.06),
0.1950.87 (0.73–1.03), 0.104Blood glucose
levels721/8035071/55256175/673389.891.891.7Reference1.27 (0.99–1.63),
0.0681.26 (0.99–1.61), 0.075Blood
lipids506/7413546/54164265/656468.365.565.0Reference0.88 (0.75–1.04),
0.1410.86 (0.73–1.01), 0.079Composite
measure37/1543422/4465576/56172.49.510.3Reference4.25 (3.02–5.98),
<0.0014.65 (3.32–6.52), <0.001

This audit also showed improvements in some of the measures of health
over time: notably, those relating to smoking (odds ratio 1.22, 95% CI
1.11–1.35, *P* < 0.001), alcohol use (odds ratio 1.43, 95% CI 1.23–1.68,
*P* < 0.001) and illicit substance use (odds ratio 1.86, 95% CI
1.68–2.07, *P* < 0.001). Furthermore, the proportion of EIP patients
with overall good health was significantly higher in the third round
compared with the first (odds ratio 4.65, 95% CI 3.32–6.52,
*P* < 0.001), although this remained the minority (10.3%). Also, EIP
patients in 2019 were significantly less likely than those in 2014 to be
in good health for the BMI measure (odds ratio 0.69, 95% CI 0.60–0.79,
*P* < 0.001).

.. _sec4:

Discussion
==========

This study corroborates previous findings that the physical health of
people with psychosis remains poor, despite an improvement in physical
health screening and intervention following national initiatives
implemented in England since 2014.\ :sup:`24`

Both CMHT and EIP audits showed improvements in health according to some
of these measures, and deteriorations in others. The proportion of
patients in overall good health according to a composite measure was low
across all rounds of both audits, but did improve significantly
post-2014 for those patients receiving care from EIP services.

Unhealthy weight remains a particular area of concern, with large
proportions of patients in poor health according to BMI across all
rounds of both audits, and a significant deterioration over time in the
EIP audit. This supports existing evidence that weight management is
challenging for patients with psychotic disorders.\ :sup:`29,30`

We did find some evidence of a modest improvement in rates of smoking
amongst patients under the care of EIP services post-2014. This
contradicts recent studies where results have been more
pessimistic,\ :sup:`25,31` but would be in line with previous research
suggesting a change in the epidemiology of smoking, with a gradual
reduction in smoking in younger age groups.\ :sup:`32` This improvement
over time was not reflected in the CMHT audit, where patients were on
average significantly older.

There was also a marked reduction post-2014 in the proportion of
patients under the care of EIP services who were using illicit
substances. This contrasted with the CMHT audit where the proportion
increased slightly over time.

.. _sec4-1:

Strengths and limitations
-------------------------

Data were obtained from large, heterogenous samples over a 9-year
period: all NHS Trusts in England with CMHT and EIP services that
provided care to patients with psychotic disorders were invited to
participate in the respective audits. These data therefore represent a
variety of different settings, and we would expect that results would be
generalisable to similar patient groups across the country. The primary
outcome measures we used to assess physical health are universally
recognised as clinically important, and the thresholds for good health
were based on national standards that have been widely used
elsewhere.\ :sup:`33–35`

However, this study does have important limitations. First, this is an
observational study and we do not know what caused the changes we
observed. Although they may reflect changes in services during this
period, other changes in society are affecting population
health,\ :sup:`36` and these could be responsible for some or all the
differences we detected.

The EIP and CMHT audits were conducted at different times, both before
and after the CQUIN framework was implemented, and used different
selection criteria. Differences in the physical health of patients
between the two are therefore likely to reflect the differing clinical
and socioeconomic demographic characteristics of the patients in each
audit, as well as different processes of care. We were able to examine
changes in physical health over time within each audit, by comparing
different rounds. However, as each service provided a random sample of
eligible patients at each round, subsequent rounds of the same audit did
not necessarily include the same cohort, and so we are unable to make
inferences about changes in health at the level of individual patients
even within the same audit.

For both the EIP and CMHT audits, we were able to examine physical
health measures before and after the introduction of the Commissioning
for Quality and Innovation programme.\ :sup:`22` Although the
introduction of the programme was associated with a marked increase in
the proportion of patients who were offered interventions for their
physical health,\ :sup:`24` we found only limited evidence that this
resulted in changes to the health of people under the care of CMHTs.

These data were produced from retrospective case note audits at each
round, and are therefore dependant on accurate reporting and
documentation of events at the time of occurrence. Clinicians working in
CMHTs and EIP services may not have had full access to records held by
primary care, where some physical health screening may have occurred.

Also, there were variable amounts of missing data for each primary
outcome measure, meaning that the composite measure could only be used
for a relatively small proportion of the overall sample. However, the
proportion of missing data did generally improve over subsequent rounds
of each audit, possibly reflecting the previously noted incentivised
improvements in screening rates and recording.\ :sup:`24`

.. _sec4-2:

Implications
------------

We found some evidence that overall health improved for patients with
psychotic disorders under the care of EIP services between 2014 and
2019. However, we did not find evidence of a similar improvement for
patients under the care of CMHTs between 2011 and 2017.

This may reflect differences in the model of care implemented by EIP
services. Typically, these services advocate a more ‘intensive’
programme of intervention, with a focus on relatively smaller
case-loads, proactive engagement and an increased frequency of
contact.\ :sup:`35–39` Although this approach is primarily intended to
address psychiatric symptoms, multiple sources have suggested additional
benefits for patients’ overall health, including increased levels of
screening for physical health problems.\ :sup:`40` EIP services may,
therefore, have been better placed to implement changes resulting from
the national initiatives rolled out in 2014.

However, the difference may also be because of differences in
demographic and clinical characteristics between patients in the CMHT
audit and the EIP audit. Patients in the EIP audit were younger on
average, and were also likely to have had a shorter duration of
psychiatric symptoms (as this audit specifically examined patients with
a diagnosed ‘first episode’ of a psychotic disorder). These patients may
have been more accepting of interventions intended to improve their
physical health and, therefore, have seen greater improvements – even if
CMHTs and EIP services had implemented identical changes since 2014.

It may even be the case that people in younger age groups have become
more ‘health conscious’ in recent years regardless of any intervention,
as suggested by some epidemiological studies.\ :sup:`32` However, this
seems unlikely in these cohorts in light of previous findings that
patients on EIP case-loads already had pronounced cardiovascular risk
factors, even at the point of first presentation.\ :sup:`25`

Both audits identified some isolated areas of improvement in specific
measures. Interestingly, these differed between the patients in the CMHT
audit, where there were improvements related to alcohol use, serum
glucose level and lipids, and the EIP audit, where there were
improvements in alcohol use, smoking and illicit substance use. Again,
these changes may relate to demographic differences in the patients
under the care of these respective services. Older patients may be more
receptive to those that they perceive as reducing their risk of major
cardiovascular events, such as reduction in serum glucose and lipids.

However, these varying improvements may also be because of differences
in the treatment approaches adopted by CMHTs and EIP services. These
findings merit further research to identify the factors explaining these
variations, as well as the improvement in overall good health seen among
those treated by EIP services. There may be elements where each service
outperforms the other; for example, access to staff with training in
physical health interventions, or improved links with primary care.
Cohort or case–control studies could be used within CMHTs and EIP
services to examine what interventions are associated with favourable
physical health outcomes at an individual patient level. Qualitative
studies to explore the perspectives of patients with psychosis may also
identify effective strategies for improving patients’ physical health.
It may also be of interest to include other services, such as assertive
outreach teams, in future studies.

The fact that the EIP audit showed an improvement in rates of illicit
substance use over time, but the CMHT audit showed the opposite, is an
intriguing finding and of unclear significance. It does not seem to
reflect the current understanding of the changing epidemiology of
illicit substance use,\ :sup:`41` and suggests that EIP services have
been able to implement effective measures to support people in
abstaining from illicit substances.

Interestingly, the one measure where both CMHTs and EIP services
improved over time was alcohol use. Many drug and alcohol services in
the UK are now provided by third-sector organisations rather than NHS
mental health teams.\ :sup:`42,43` The fact that both CMHTs and EIP
services were able to effect improvement suggests that effective liaison
with external organisations may be a key strategy for improvement,
rather than attempting to deliver more services with internal
infrastructure, which may already be overstretched.

Both audits showed specific areas where standards of physical health
worsened over time. The findings related to patients’ weight are
particularly concerning: the proportion of patients with a healthy BMI
fell significantly across the three rounds of the EIP audit, and was
universally low in the CMHT audit. Weight gain is a well-recognised and
particular troubling side-effect of many antipsychotic
medications.\ :sup:`17` Given the implications of obesity for subjective
well-being, medication adherence and therapeutic outcomes in the context
of treatment for psychosis, and associated diabetes and cardiovascular
risk and likelihood of premature mortality,\ :sup:`44–46` improving
interventions in this area needs to remain a focus for researchers. To
date, studies of current weight management programmes for people with
psychosis have produced mixed results.\ :sup:`47–49`

In addition to these findings, it is also important to note that the
majority of patients did not have adequate information recorded for all
seven of the physical health measures recommended by nationally agreed
standards. Only around half of patients in the EIP audit, and a third of
those in the CMHT audit, had usable data recorded for all seven
measures. The reasons for this are unclear from this project, and may
reflect barriers to physical health screening, such as refusal, lack of
provision or inadequate documentation. Clearly, accurate monitoring is
required, and will be the focus of quality improvement activities before
future rounds of the national audits.

In conclusion, we found limited evidence that overall health improved
for patients with psychotic disorders under the care of CMHTs, following
the enactment of national initiatives in 2014, although there was some
evidence of improvement in specific areas. There was more substantial
evidence of improvements for those patients under the care of EIP
services. This may be a result of differences in CMHT and EIP services’
abilities to implement effective changes in policy and procedures, or
demographic and clinical differences in their respective patients.
However, these findings merit further research into the processes
underlying the improvements in health, to improve the standard of care
for people with psychosis.

The authors would like to thank all members of the NCAP team at the
Royal College of Psychiatrists, for their support with this study.

**Ryan Williams** is an NIHR Academic Clinical Fellow at the Department
of Brain Sciences, Imperial College London, UK, and a Clinical Fellow
with the College Centre for Quality Improvement, Royal College of
Psychiatrists, UK. **Sagana Natkulasingam** is a medical student at the
Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, UK. **Beatrice Tooke** is
an NCAP Programme Manager with the College Centre for Quality
Improvement, Royal College of Psychiatrists, UK. **Ella Webster** is an
NCAP Programme Manager with the College Centre for Quality Improvement,
Royal College of Psychiatrists, UK. **Alan Quirk** is Head of Clinical
Audit and Research for the College Centre for Quality Improvement, Royal
College of Psychiatrists, UK. **Veenu Gupta** is a Service User Advisor
with the College Centre for Quality Improvement, Royal College of
Psychiatrists, UK. **Paul French** is an Honorary Professor with the
Department of Psychological Sciences, University of Liverpool, UK, and
an NCAP EIP Clinical Advisor with the College Centre for Quality
Improvement, Royal College of Psychiatrists, UK. **Jo Smith** is
Professor of EIP and Psychosis at the School of Allied Health and
Community, University of Worcester, UK, and an NCAP EIP Clinical Advisor
with the College Centre for Quality Improvement, Royal College of
Psychiatrists, UK. **Mike J. Crawford** is Professor of Psychiatry at
the Department of Brain Sciences, Imperial College London, UK, and
Director of the College Centre for Quality Improvement, Royal College of
Psychiatrists, UK.

.. _sec-das1:

Data availability
=================

All authors had access to the full study data-set. The data-set is held
by the NCAP team at the College Centre for Quality Improvement, Royal
College of Psychiatrists, and could be made available on request.

M.J.C. formulated the presented research question, designed the study
and supervised the work. R.W. and S.N. performed the statistical
analysis. R.W. drafted the manuscript and designed the figures. B.T.,
E.W., A.Q., V.G., P.F. and J.S. were involved in gathering and
processing the NCAP data, and commented on drafts of the manuscript.

R.W. is supported by a UK National Institute for Health Research (NIHR)
Academic Clinical Fellowship (ACF-2017-21-006). The NCAP is commissioned
by the Healthcare Quality Improvement Partnership (HQIP) as part of the
National Clinical Audit and Patient Outcome Programme (NCAPOP), which is
funded by NHS England and the Welsh Government. The views expressed are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR, the
Royal College of Psychiatrists or the Department of Health. The funders
had no role in the design or conduct of the study; collection,
management, analysis or interpretation of the data; preparation, review
or approval of the manuscript; or decision to submit the manuscript for
publication.

.. _nts5:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. [1]
   CMHT, community mental health team; EIP, early intervention in
   psychosis.
