=================================================================================================================================
Improving Access and Confidence in Learning Lessons From Serious Incidents: A Quality Improvement Project Aimed at Junior Doctors
=================================================================================================================================



Cornelia Beyers
Eleanor Parkinson
Rajendra Harsh
Sameer Nardeosingh
Dolapo Oseji
Alice Packham
Nick Conway
Renarta Rowe
Ruth Scally
Joshua Rochelle-Bates
Onaiza Awais
Farhaana Surti*Presenting author.

:date: 2022-06

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims
      :name: sec_a1

   Birmingham and Solihull Mental Health Foundation Trust (BSMHFT)
   previously developed some methods of learning lessons following
   serious incidents. However, despite various systems available,
   frontline junior doctors were not regularly exposed to important
   learning opportunities. This potentially resulted in doctors not
   being aware of learning from serious incidents, and not feeling
   embedded within the organisation, with potential effects on their
   training experience. As we identified an unmet need within the Trust
   in learning lessons from serious incidents amongst junior doctors, we
   aimed to improve access and confidence in learning from serious
   incidents by starting a Quality Improvement project on this theme.

   .. rubric:: Methods
      :name: sec_a2

   The current approach involved a comprehensive quarterly bulletin
   circulated by email to staff. An initial survey confirmed that this
   was not very effective in delivering learning lessons information to
   junior doctors.

   Using a QI driver diagram, we identified potential areas for change.
   Selected change ideas were sequentially trialled including shortened
   email bulletins, supervision templates and remote learning lessons
   sessions. Initial PDSAs highlighted difficulties with communication
   via email, with many trainees failing to read/engage with this
   format.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a3

   The use of remote interactive learning sessions yielded positive
   results, with improvement in the confidence in learning from Serious
   incidents. We therefore continued to refine this method to wider
   groups.

   During the COVID-19 pandemic we experienced multiple setbacks and
   created a timeline tosupport team morale, maintain team energy,
   visualise progress and motivate the team. We therefore managed to
   persevere and strengthened the group by recruiting members to the
   team and complete the project.

   .. rubric:: Conclusion
      :name: sec_a4

   The team have been able to create a sustainable, effective and
   interactive short teaching session which has shown to be effective in
   engaging trainees in this vital area and help us meet our aim. This
   format further has the potential to be refined and implemented
   locally and nationally.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
