============================================
Have You Seen the NEWS Today? - a QI Project
============================================



Harleen Kaur Birgi*Presenting author.
:Date: 2022-06

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims
      :name: sec_a1

   The main focus of this QIP was to improve the documentation of NEWS
   (National early warning scores) and subsequent escalation as
   appropriate in an Old Age Psychiatric Ward setting. This would in
   turn lead to improved Physical health outcomes, especially in the
   COVID-19 pandemic.

   .. rubric:: Methods
      :name: sec_a2

   The NEWS chart is based on a simple aggregate scoring system in which
   a score is allocated to physiological measurements, when patients
   present to, or are being monitored in hospital. This will ensure that
   patients who are deteriorating, or at risk of deteriorating, will
   have a timely initial assessment. This should supplement clinical
   judgement in assessing the patient's condition.

   Early detection and escalation of deteriorating NEWS leads to
   improved patient outcomes and referral to the appropriate
   specialties, for subsequent management.

   The initial phase of the QIP comprised of retrospective data
   collection surrounding the recognition and documentation of NEWS on
   an 18-bedded Old age Psychiatric ward. This period spanned the 2nd
   wave of the pandemic, from November- December.

   Potential interventions were implemented in the form of raising NEWS
   awareness by educating nursing staff via teaching sessions,
   displaying posters all over the ward and nursing station. Team also
   reviewed all NEWS charts everyday during ward management rounds which
   served as a daily reminder for the staff measuring the observations.

   NEWS of & greater than 3 was defined as the threshold for escalation.

   Following change implementation, data were collected to capture the
   progress made over a month.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a3

   Analysis of data pre and post- interventions displayed a significant
   improvement in escalation of unwell patients from 26% to 60%.

   .. rubric:: Conclusion
      :name: sec_a4

   Improved outcomes and early detection of potentially deteriorating
   patients, leading to early transfer of patients to an Acute Medical
   setting and better overall management.

   Raised awareness and understanding of physical health management in
   Mental Health nurses.

   The QIP was presented at the Trust QI Forum meeting and was met by
   and overwhelmingly positive response. In order to enhance NEWS
   recording an electronic format is now being adapted. There is also a
   consideration around providing regular NEWS teaching sessions to all
   inpatient staff across the trust.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
