=================================================================================
Psychiatric leadership development in postgraduate medical education and training
=================================================================================



Alex Till
Radhika Sen
Helen Crimlisk

:Correspondence: Dr Alex Till (alextill54@gmail.com) [1]_

:date: 2022-06

:Abstract:
   The value of strong, compassionate medical leadership in the delivery
   of high-quality care to patients within mental health services is
   clear. Leadership development, however, is far less well explored.
   This article is for psychiatric trainees, trainers and mental health
   organisations. It provides an introduction to the importance of
   leadership development within postgraduate medical training, the
   theory that should underpin its delivery, and the opportunities for
   both informal and formal leadership development within psychiatric
   training.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Doctors are frequently the head of healthcare teams,\ :sup:`1` with
leadership an emergent theme within the skills, knowledge and behaviours
required of our future doctors.\ :sup:`2` Leadership is the most
influential factor in shaping organisational culture.\ :sup:`3` It must
be compassionate to stimulate improvement and innovation,\ :sup:`4` and
is the hallmark of high-quality care.\ :sup:`5`

Leadership can be conceptualised as ‘a process that occurs in a group
context, involving the influence of others towards the attainment of a
common goal’.\ :sup:`6` Yet leadership is better conceptualised as a
‘triad’, whereby leadership, management and followership are distinct,
but inextricably linked skills, and hereafter are considered as
one.\ :sup:`7,8`

Leadership has been formally recognised as a responsibility for all
doctors since 2012,\ :sup:`9` and is gradually being integrated into
both undergraduate\ :sup:`10` and postgraduate medical
curricula.\ :sup:`11` To help guide trainees’ development within these
domains, the Faculty of Medical Leadership and Management (FMLM) have
produced standards for medical professionals\ :sup:`12` that clearly
outline four key domains for doctors: A doctor's ability to know and
understand themselves and their impact on others.A doctor's ability to
know when to lead and follow, and how to establish and lead teams.A
doctor's ability to understand and positively contribute to the
strategic direction and operational delivery of their organisation.A
doctor's ability to understand and positively contribute to the
healthcare system.

Despite this initiative, the relevance and importance of leadership
development is yet to be fully embraced by the medical profession. It is
often still perceived as an ‘optional extra’ within medical
training,\ :sup:`13` and an unpopular, unrewarding and risky
‘add-on’.\ :sup:`14` This lack of external validation, and outdated
traditional view of medical professionalism, compromises the development
of so-called ‘willing hybrids’, and the integration of leadership and
managerialism as a legitimate and essential aspect of medical
professionalism.\ :sup:`15,16`

The argument for strong medical leadership within healthcare
organisations is well defined.\ :sup:`17,18` Mental health services face
unprecedented challenges on an almost daily basis. Doctors must be
engaged in leadership\ :sup:`19` and with their organisations as a
whole.\ :sup:`20` They must be capable of understanding and overcoming
the volatile, uncertain, complex and ambiguous\ :sup:`21` nature of
providing not only health, but also social care, within an increasingly
integrated systems-based approach.

Leadership development, therefore, is crucial, yet far less well
explored. There is little robust evidence for the effectiveness of
specific leadership development programmes, with a proliferation of
diverse interventions throughout medical training and healthcare as a
whole.\ :sup:`3`

It is clear, however, that the systematic integration of basic
leadership development for all doctors needs to be embedded throughout
postgraduate medical training, supplemented by enhanced and advanced
opportunities for aspiring medical leaders, and that trainees themselves
need to realise and accept leadership responsibility.

This article is for psychiatric trainees, trainers and mental health
organisations. It builds on the already established position
highlighting the positive impact of psychiatrists on leadership and
management.\ :sup:`22` It provides an introduction to the importance of
leadership development within postgraduate medical training, the theory
that should underpin its delivery, and the opportunities for both
informal and formal leadership development available to psychiatric
trainees within postgraduate medical training throughout the UK.

.. _sec1:

Leadership development theory
=============================

Healthcare, like many other industries, often falls victim to the ‘great
training robbery’.\ :sup:`23` Organisations frequently support and
encourage individuals to undertake externally provided leadership
development programmes, and yet often fail to provide appropriate
conditions on their return for them to contextualise and apply their
learning within their clinical environment. Although this can be
successful in developing their knowledge, skills and competencies, it
effectively sets them up to fail, and leads to the continuation of
entrenched and established ways of working.\ :sup:`24`

If exclusively developed within the ‘classroom’, development will
largely remain ‘horizontal’,\ :sup:`25` and leaders will fail to learn
how to change and adapt to ever-changing circumstances.\ :sup:`23`
Alternatively, an ‘\ *in vivo*\ ’ approach, with the right conditions
coordinated throughout a programme, can harness ‘vertical’ leadership
development through the delivery of ‘heat experiences’, ‘colliding
perspectives’ and ‘elevated sense-making’.\ :sup:`26`

Heat experiences involve organisations taking calculated risks, and
exposing leaders, who themselves must take a risk, to complex
uncomfortable first-time challenges. Here, they are forced to grow, not
just because they want to, but because there is a chance of failure,
people are watching, and results matter. They are ‘the what’ that
compels leaders to disrupt and disorient their traditional thinking
styles, to discover new and better ways to make sense of the challenges
they face. Caution must be excised, however, to get the ‘temperature
right’, and control the heat within a safe space, with the right
support, available at the right time, to help the individual stay within
that learning ‘sweet spot’. Importantly, there also needs to be an
appropriate level of both individual and organisational tolerance of
failure.\ :sup:`27`

Colliding perspectives expand the number of lenses through which a
leader can analyse complexity and challenge their existing mental
models.\ :sup:`28` Individuals are encouraged to view the world through
the eyes of different stakeholders, including that of patients, carers
and other members of the multidisciplinary team, and by standing in
their shoes, learn to identify and manage conflicting paradigms. Ideally
combined with peer coaching, partnered with different disciplines, these
colliding perspectives provide ‘the who’ that is inclusive and embraces
a range of diverse thought.\ :sup:`29`

Elevated sense-making is the final piece, ‘the how’, that leads to
transformational change.\ :sup:`30` Not only must structured reflection
(through reflective practice groups or action learning sets) be
facilitated to allow leaders to reflect on their development over time
and integrate their experiences with new found perspectives, but their
development should be guided by experienced coaches or mentors.

It is vital that these three conditions are provided within postgraduate
medical training, whether through activities embedded informally within
the work environment, or formally via a targeted approach within
leadership development programmes. Although value can still be extracted
from opportunities that do not provide these conditions, leadership
talent will remain untapped and dormant within healthcare organisations
unless these are met.\ :sup:`31`

.. _sec2:

Informal leadership development
===============================

The common perception of leadership as an optional extra remains
pervasive throughout the medical workforce. Combined with a ‘curriculum
lag’, whereby there is a delay in implementing and adopting the latest
evidence into training, the development of leadership competencies
remains somewhat tokenistic.\ :sup:`32` The stars are aligning, however,
and the importance of leadership development in both undergraduate and
postgraduate medical curricula is slowly being realised.\ :sup:`33`

The message is clear. Leadership development does not begin or end at
any particular stage of training. Leadership is for all doctors, at
every stage, and should not be postponed until doctors are formally
appointed to a leadership or management position. Leadership is rather a
developmental process on a lifelong continuum, with individuals nurtured
to help recognise and fulfil leadership roles, especially in the
earliest of stages of their careers.\ :sup:`34`

Everyday leadership experiences are commonplace within psychiatric
clinical settings, where decision-making is complex and ethical tensions
arise through divergent views, roles and responsibilities within
teams.\ :sup:`35` Although often undervalued, these present opportune
leadership development experiences where, among a range of other
activities, leadership can be developed through acute crisis situations,
multidisciplinary meetings, mentoring junior colleagues, medical
education, clinical governance and quality improvement projects. It is
important to recognise, name and make sense of these everyday leadership
experiences within training, through supervision, and allow trainees to
recognise the value of ‘little l’ leadership within their
teams.\ :sup:`36`

More formal opportunities also exist through representative roles
available locally, regionally and nationally, that can all lead on to
providing more enhanced leadership experiences and the three primary
conditions of vertical leadership development in their own right.
Likewise, voluntary and additional professional activities can provide
excellent leadership experience. For example, roles available within
Royal Colleges, special interest groups, trade unions, healthcare
regulators, the General Medical Council, or as a governor for healthcare
and affiliated organisations.

Irrespective of the particular opportunity, whether formal or informal,
obtaining feedback is critical for gaining insight into the trainees’
own perception of their leadership capabilities, and the perceptions
held by others of their behaviours and performance.

Integral tools within psychiatric training for facilitating such
structured feedback are the Mini-Peer Assessment Tool and Direct
Observation of Non-Clinical Skills (DONCS) workplace-based assessments.
These are used across the General Medical Council-approved curricula for
both core and specialty psychiatric training within the UK, to assess a
trainees performance and allow trainees to demonstrate their leadership
capabilities.\ :sup:`37,38`

Originally founded on The CanMEDS 2005 Physician Competency
framework,\ :sup:`39` DONCS are applicable to a range of diverse
non-clinical skills, and structuring feedback on leadership experiences
around the seven domains can at times feel convoluted and ambiguous.

`Table 1 <#tab01>`__ has been conceptualised from the evidence base to
help suggest key competencies for psychiatric leaders within a DONCS
assessment, and aims to support both trainees and trainers attaining and
delivering feedback.\ :sup:`39–42` Table 1Your guide to a Leadership and
Management DONCSDONCS domainDONCS descriptorMedical expertAs a medical
expert, the psychiatric leader integrates the other six intrinsic roles
(as below) to negotiate complexity, uncertainty and ambiguity, while
contributing to continuous improvement and maintaining the highest
standards of clinical knowledge, person-centred care and professional
values.CommunicatorAs communicators, psychiatric leaders will develop
trusted interpersonal relationships with and between individuals. They
will accurately elicit, synthesise and convey relevant information, in
both oral and written form, to develop a shared understanding between
stakeholders of the relevant issues, problems and plans at
hand.CollaboratorAs collaborators, psychiatric leaders will work
effectively in partnership with patients, carers and extended
multidisciplinary teams of expert professionals. This will take place in
multiple locations, within and across organisational boundaries, to
deliver optimal patient care and prevent, negotiate and resolve
interpersonal conflict.ManagerAs managers, psychiatric leaders will
participate in the improvement of healthcare delivery, manage resources
appropriately, develop competence in health informatics and contribute
to the effectiveness of the team, organisation and system they work
within.Health advocateAs health advocates, psychiatric leaders will
promote diversity and inclusion. They will utilise their expertise and
influence to identify and advance the health and well-being of
individual patients, communities and populations.ScholarAs a scholar,
the psychiatric leader pursues continuous personal and professional
development. They will critically evaluate information, facilitate and
create a safe space for the mentoring and learning of others, and
contribute to the creation, dissemination and integration of
evidence-based knowledge into practice.ProfessionalAs a professional,
the psychiatric leader engages with healthcare regulation; maintains the
highest standards of personal, professional and ethical behaviour;
embraces a compassionate and inclusive approach and is committed to
reflective practice. They support the well-being of both themselves and
the staff around them. [2]_

.. _sec3:

Formal leadership development
=============================

There are a plethora of leadership development programmes, schemes and
other opportunities available throughout the UK. This can be confusing
for both trainees and trainers alike, occurring both in and out of
training programmes, with a diverse range of requirements, levels of
involvement and financial commitment.

Attempting to provide a brief description of these opportunities, `Table
2 <#tab02>`__ outlines a sample of the variety of leadership and
management training that is currently available to psychiatric trainees
within the UK. It is important to remember, however, that there is an
almost constantly evolving stream of new opportunities depending on
interests and geography, and that this table is likely to be quickly
outdated. Table 2Leadership and management training availability to
psychiatric trainees (correct as of 2020/21)Eligibility/targetKey
pointsFellowships (12 months)Outside of local education
providerNationalNational Medical Directors Clinical Fellow
Scheme\ :sup:`43,`\ `a <#tfn2_2>`__\ On completion of the Foundation
ProgrammeFunded, out of programme, centrally recruited to national
organisations. Apprenticeship model, developed in collaboration with UK
Government and arm's length bodies, mentored by senior national leaders
and undertake a range of project and policy work.Welsh Clinical
Leadership Training Fellowship\ :sup:`44,`\ `a <#tfn2_2>`__\ C/ST3 and
aboveScottish Clinical Leadership Fellowship
Scheme\ :sup:`45,`\ `a <#tfn2_2>`__\ C/ST2 and aboveNorthern Ireland
(NIMDTA) Achieve, Develop, Explore Programme for Trainees
(ADEPT)\ :sup:`46,`\ `a <#tfn2_2>`__\ ST4 and aboveLocal/regionalDarzi
Fellowship Programme – London South Bank
University\ :sup:`47,`\ `a <#tfn2_2>`__\ C/ST3 and aboveFunded, out of
programme, individually recruited to local/regional organisations
through NHS Jobs. Undertake London South Bank University PGCert in
Leadership in Health, alongside work-based fellowship challenges.Future
Leaders Programme – Health Education Yorkshire and
Humber\ :sup:`48,`\ `a <#tfn2_2>`__\ C/ST3 and aboveFunded, out of
programme, individually recruited to local/regional organisations
through NHS Jobs. Undertake PGCert of their choice, alongside work-based
fellowship challenges.Within local education providerNationalRoyal
College of Psychiatrists’ Leadership and Management Fellow
Scheme\ :sup:`49`\ ST4 and aboveSponsored, in programme experience,
utilising special interest time, individually recruited to by
local/regional organisations. Face to face (7 days, London/Liverpool),
with work-based application.Royal College of Physicians’ (London) Chief
Registrar Programme\ :sup:`50,`\ `a <#tfn2_2>`__\ ST4 and aboveFunded,
in or out of programme experience, individually recruited to by local
organisations. Face to face (5 days, London/Liverpool) and 40–50%
protected time to practice leadership and quality improvement.Courses
and programmesNationalRoyal College of Psychiatrists’ Leadership and
Management for Trainees and New Consultants\ :sup:`51`\ Available to
allSelf-funded, face to face (1 day).NHS Leadership Academy Edward
Jenner (6 weeks)\ :sup:`52`\ Available to allFree, online (5 h per
week), with work-based application.NHS Leadership Academy Mary Seacole
(6 months) or Rosalind Franklin (9 months)\ :sup:`52`\ Core or higher
training, respectivelyPredominantly self-funded (circa £1000),
sponsorship and bursaries available *ad hoc*. Online (5 h per week) and
face to face (Mary Seacole 3 days/Rosalind Franklin 8 days – regional),
with work-based application.NHS Wales 1000 Lives ‘Improving Quality
Together’\ :sup:`53`\ Available to allFree, online (bronze) and face to
face (silver, 2 days), with work-based application.Northern Ireland
(NIMDTA) ENGAGE Clinical Leadership and Improvement
Programme\ :sup:`54`\ ST5 and aboveFunded, face to face (1 day, 7
evenings).NHS Education for Scotland Leadership and Management Programme
(LaMP)\ :sup:`55`\ C/ST3 and aboveFunded, online and face to face (2
days), with work-based application.Local/regionalLearning to Lead – East
Midlands Leadership and management programme (3 years)\ :sup:`56`\ On
completion of the Foundation ProgrammeFunded, face to face (3 days),
with work-based application through a multi-professional quality
improvement project.Chief Residents’ Management and Leadership Programme
– Health Education East of England\ :sup:`57`\ ST5 and aboveFunded,
centrally recruited, face to face (10-day Judge Business School
‘mini-MBA’), with work-based application and supported leadership
role.Postgraduate educationMaster's in Medical Leadership (MSc)Various
institutions offer ‘step-on, step-off approach’ from PGCert to PGDip to
MSc (1–3 years)\ :sup:`58,59`\ Available to allPredominantly self-funded
(£2500–£25 000), sponsorship and bursaries available. Part time,
moderate workload, variable online versus face to face.Master's in
Business Administration (MBA)Various institutions, some offer healthcare
specialties or NHS endorsement (2–3 years)\ :sup:`60,61`\ Available to
allPredominantly self-funded (£15 000–£90 000), sponsorship and
bursaries available. Part time, heavy workload, variable online versus
face to face. [3]_ [4]_

Such formal leadership development could be conceptualised through a
tiered approach (`Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__). Firstly, basic generic
professional capabilities are provided in leadership for all doctors via
an integrated approach within local training programmes. A second tier
then provides enhanced local and regional leadership development offers
for future service and divisional leaders. Then finally, at the upper
tier, nationally coordinated, advanced programmes and fellowships, are
delivered for aspiring organisational- and system-level leaders. Fig. 1A
tiered approach to leadership development. FMLM, Faculty of Medical
Leadership and Management.

.. _sec4:

Discussion
==========

It is important to note that leadership development does not suit a
one-size-fits-all approach, and that the evidence does not suggest that
any particular activity should be completed before another.\ :sup:`3`

Up to 90% of learning occurs informally, through often spontaneous,
unstructured activities embedded within the work environment.\ :sup:`62`
As revealed through the developmental journeys of medical, clinical and
managerial National Health Service chief executives,\ :sup:`63` although
formal leadership development can be transformational for some, it is
insufficient in isolation.

Leadership development can often be better attributed to engagement with
inspirational role models, and through the opportunistic experiences
that emerging leaders seized because they could, and because they were
motivated to make a difference.

For this very reason, it is vital that we overcome the shortage of role
models with protected characteristics. Those in medical leadership
positions must reflect the wider workforce and communities we
serve.\ :sup:`64` It is not permissible to allow ourselves to fall
victim to a complex range of social, cultural, political, economic and
historical factors, whether unconsciously or otherwise, that marginalise
and disempower aspiring leaders from diverse backgrounds.

Equality and diversity should be a top priority for all individuals and
organisations. We must counteract the deeply embedded prejudice and
discrimination that have become endemic within modern
society.\ :sup:`65` No matter what the characteristic, whether it be
gender, sexual orientation, race, religion or any other characteristic
that differs from the majority of leaders, these individuals do not
easily fit within a structure that is coded towards the ‘snowy white
peaks of the NHS’,\ :sup:`66` and this must be overcome.

To build this diversity into our psychiatric leadership, and that we
need within our mental health services, we must embrace the ‘lived
experience’ of talented leaders regardless of demographic differences,
and adopt an inclusive leadership approach.\ :sup:`67,68` After all,
organisations with greater inclusion, rather than merely diversity, are
proven to perform better, with greater improvement and innovation,
higher levels of morale, and new insights that maximise the potential of
employees.\ :sup:`68,69`

As Vernā Myers puts it ‘Diversity is being invited to the party;
inclusion is being asked to dance’.\ :sup:`70`

Multiple strategies can be employed to improve diversity and develop an
inclusive approach,\ :sup:`65–72` but it is no easy task. Fundamentally,
it is a cultural change. All doctors, and particularly existing leaders,
must engage with these groups, create a psychologically safe space,
listen to their stories, confront the hard truths laid bare by their
experiences, and challenge the status quo, making diversity and
inclusion a personal priority. Allies from non-disadvantaged or less
discriminated against groups can confront and have a powerful impact on
the behaviour of others. They must not just question what privileges
they have been afforded that others might not, but question and reflect
on the absence of challenges and barriers that they have not had to
overcome but others might. Crucially, they must then act, working within
the organisation and system to counteract and mitigate these for others.

Individuals should not feel like ‘outsiders’. We should rather recognise
an individual's need to belong and proactively seek role models with
greater diversity, to make the inclusion of leaders with protected
characteristics explicit and visible. This allows those from
marginalised groups to identify with the existing leadership, see
themselves as leaders and, crucially, feel empowered to seize those
opportunistic leadership experiences that are so crucial for their
development. In combination, active career sponsorship will be crucial
to retain and advance their leadership talent, with mentorship being a
powerful mechanism for both the individual and the
organisation.\ :sup:`68,73`

It truly is an inclusive leadership approach that is required.
Demographic diversity in isolation, is insufficient. Active
role-modelling and the support of key allies in existing leadership
positions is essential to provide equitable access to formal and
informal leadership development.

Just as we would expect within clinical practice, trainees of all
backgrounds must be supported by experienced trainers who expose them to
increasingly uncomfortable challenges, yet who provide them with the
psychological safety net to take risks, experiment and develop ‘on the
job’.

.. _sec5:

Conclusions
===========

Mental health services face unprecedented challenges on an almost daily
basis. To survive in this world, and lead quality improvement towards
more preventative, holistic and personalised care, doctors must develop
a deep understanding of leadership and effectively demonstrate the core
values and behaviours expected of medical professionals.

Greater attention must be paid towards medical leadership development
and an inclusive approach, whereby all doctors, from every background,
are supported to advance. This has never been more important. The view
of leadership development being an optional extra within medicine, or a
skill set to be developed later in a medical professional's career, is
outdated.

No matter which one of the many diverse interventions are pursued,
doctors must engage with, and be supported in, both informal and formal
leadership development. This is a collective responsibility, and much
more must be done to ensure equity of access to leadership development
for all, from the earliest of stages in a doctor's career.

**Dr Alex Till** (MBChB, MRCPsych, MSc, MBA) is a Specialty Registrar in
Forensic Psychiatry with Health Education England – North West, UK. **Dr
Radhika Sen** (BSc, MBChB, MRCPsych) is a Consultant Psychiatrist in
General Adult and Old Age Psychiatry with Camden and Islington NHS
Foundation Trust, UK; and a Leadership and Management Fellow (2019/20)
with the Royal College of Psychiatrists, UK. **Dr Helen Crimlisk**
(FRCPsych, MSc, FAcadMEd) is Deputy Medical Director of Sheffield Health
and Social Care NHS Foundation Trust, UK; an Associate Registrar for
Leadership and Management with the Royal College of Psychiatrists, UK;
and a Generation Q Fellow with The Health Foundation, UK.

We confirm that all authors meet the four ICMJE criteria for authorship,
being equally involved in the design, drafting and revision of the
article.

.. _nts2:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. [1]
   See pp. XX–XX, this issue.

.. [2]
   DONCS, Direct Observation of Non-Clinical Skills.

.. [3]
   NIMDTA, Northern Ireland Medical & Dental Training Agency; NHS,
   National Health Service; PGCert, Postgraduate Certificate; MBA,
   Master of Business Administration; MSc, Master of Science; PGDip,
   Postgraduate Diploma.

.. [4]
   Predominantly non-clinical (although some do allow limited ongoing
   clinical activity), and therefore often require an extension to
   training via out-of-programme experience approval.
