==========================================================================
Effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on provision of electroconvulsive therapy
==========================================================================



Richard Braithwaite
Robert Chaplin
Vimal SivasankerCorrespondence to Richard Braithwaite
(richard.braithwaite@nhs.net)
:Date: 2022-06

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   COVID-19 has had a heavy impact on healthcare provision worldwide,
   including delivery of electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). A survey was
   completed in the UK and Republic of Ireland in April and July 2020 by
   95 and 89 ECT clinics respectively.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   In April 2020, 53% of the clinics provided only emergency treatment
   and 24% had closed. Reasons included unavailability of anaesthetists,
   infection control measures and staff sickness. Restrictions persisted
   in July, with disruption to an estimated 437 individuals’ treatment
   and poor outcomes, including clinical deterioration and readmission.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Risk stratification, longer clinic sessions, improvements in
   ventilation, regular virus testing, pragmatic staff rostering and
   availability of personal protective equipment will protect against
   service disruption in subsequent waves of the pandemic.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Recent editorials in the *BJPsych*\ :sup:`1–3` concerning the effects of
COVID-19 on psychiatry were written at the outset of the pandemic. It
would perhaps have been impossible for their authors to have predicted
what has been by far the most devastating effect of the pandemic on
psychiatric care: suspension or reduction of normal service provision.
This has included minimisation of face-to-face care and, crucially,
limited provision of one of the most effective psychiatric treatments,
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT).

ECT typically involves aerosol-generating procedures (AGPs), including
bag-mask ventilation, suction of secretions and, less commonly,
laryngeal mask or endotracheal airway insertion and removal.\ :sup:`4`
It was apparent early on in the pandemic that ECT might pose a risk of
viral transmission between patients and healthcare professionals, and
that alterations to practice might be needed to ensure safety. However,
it quickly became apparent that provision of ECT was rapidly diminishing
in most areas and even grinding to a halt in some. Anecdotally,
anaesthesia staff had been redeployed in many localities but, although
anticipated, significant levels of staff sickness and shielding were yet
to be encountered.

We present the findings of a survey conducted at two time points during
the pandemic. The aim of the study was to establish the nature, extent
and effects of any disruption to ECT services, with a view to
establishing how obstacles to full service provision might be overcome
in due course.

The survey was conducted by the ECT Accreditation Service (ECTAS), the
department of the Royal College of Psychiatrists responsible for the
setting and monitoring of clinical standards in the delivery of ECT
services across three regions of the UK (England, Wales and Northern
Ireland) as well as in the Republic of Ireland. The survey did not cover
ECT clinics in Scotland, where standards are set and monitored by the
Scottish ECT Accreditation Network.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

Each ECTAS member clinic was sent a link to an online survey via the
network's email discussion group during two 1-week periods in April and
July 2020. The questionnaire was developed following consultation with
clinical experts from ECTAS. Reminders were sent to non-responding
clinics 2 days before the closing dates. Because this was a
retrospective survey of clinicians and did not influence patient care,
ethical approval was not required.

In addition to the questions set out in `Table 1 <#tab01>`__,
respondents were asked for the total number of patients at their clinic
who had had their treatment affected by the pandemic since 16 March
2020, including those who would otherwise have received ECT but had not.
Table 1Survey responses from ECT clinics in England, Wales, Northern
Ireland and the Republic of IrelandQuestionsResponses, *n* (%)April
2020July 2020Is your ECT service currently being affected by the
COVID-19 pandemic?Yes84 (88)69 (78)No11 (12)20 (22)What is the
reason?\ `a <#tfn1_2>`__\ Lack of availability of anaesthetists49 (52)10
(11)Increased PPE/environmental requirement43 (45)7 (8)Required
infection control procedures have reduced treatment
capacity\ `b <#tfn1_3>`__–48 (54)Staff sickness/shielding43 (45)10
(11)Staff redeployed\ `b <#tfn1_3>`__–3 (3)Other\ `c <#tfn1_4>`__\ 20
(21)23 (26)What has been the impact on service
provision?\ `a <#tfn1_2>`__\ No service provided at present23 (24)8
(9)Reduced number of sessions12 (13)13 (15)Service restricted to most
urgent/severe cases50 (53)38 (43)Other\ `d <#tfn1_5>`__\ 14 (15)25
(28)What has been the effect on patients who would normally have
received ECT prior to the pandemic?\ `a <#tfn1_2>`__\ Having ECT at a
different clinic16 (17)20 (22)Reduced frequency of ECT20 (21)14 (16)Not
having any ECT, in-patient, duration of stay potentially increased47
(49)28 (31)Not having any ECT, discharged from hospital17 (18)17 (19)ECT
course curtailed35 (37)19 (21)Continuation/maintenance ECT stopped46
(48)42 (47)Clinical condition worsened, probably as a result18 (19)29
(33)Admitted to hospital3 (3)16 (18)Detained in hospital1 (1)6
(7) [1]_ [2]_ [3]_ [4]_ [5]_

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

We are aware of 108 ECT clinics in existence in the four regions covered
by this study; of those, 98 are members of ECTAS and were sent surveys
to complete. In total, 95 clinics (97%) submitted responses to the
survey in April 2020 and 89 (91%) in July 2020. Thus, our data cover 89%
and 82% of all existing clinics at the two time points respectively.

The main findings are summarised in `Table 1 <#tab01>`__. Of 95 clinics,
84 (88%) were being adversely affected by the pandemic in April 2020: 50
(53%) were restricting ECT to the most urgent and/or severe cases and 22
(23%) were providing no service at all. By July, of 89 clinics, 69 (78%)
were still affected, with 38 (43%) restricting cases and 8 (9%)
remaining closed.

Additionally, the 364 patients who had had their treatment affected by
the pandemic since 16 March 2020, including those who had had ECT
withheld, had risen to 437 by July 2020. One clinic alone had had the
treatment of 41 patients affected.

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

Our survey shows that the vast majority of ECT services have been, and
continue to be, adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Obstacles
to delivery of ECT have been, and remain, various.

Anaesthetists and operating department practitioners were withdrawn from
ECT lists to staff enlarged intensive care units (ICUs), despite most
ICUs never having even neared capacity. This affected over half of the
clinics at the beginning of the pandemic, with some still experiencing
problems by July 2020, when the first peak of COVID-19 infections had
long subsided.

Some ECT suites, with no means for adequate ventilation, have been
unable to safely host a treatment that potentially involves AGPs. Even
those suites that were adequately ventilated or have since been fitted
with ventilation systems may continue to operate at reduced patient
capacity. Many require patients to fully recover in treatment rooms
owing to limited space for safe distancing between patients elsewhere
and repurposing of recovery areas for doffing of personal protective
equipment (PPE). Even in suites that retain separate recovery areas, the
treatment room must be left fallow after any AGP for a set period before
cleaning in preparation for the next patient. In some clinics this is as
long as 30 min, depending on the frequency of air changes the room.

Treatment rooms require full cleaning between patients, and staff
members spend a lot of time donning and doffing PPE. These necessities
at best halve patient throughput.\ :sup:`5` Some ECT services run from
suites without adequate ventilation have instead delivered treatments in
general hospital operating theatres,\ :sup:`6` which are subject not
only to the restrictions listed above but also necessitate vying for
time and facilities with surgical teams. Additionally, poor supply of
PPE may have temporarily limited ECT provision in some hospitals.

The resultant loss of productivity has been devastating for many
patients. It has led to services variously cancelling all ECT or
prioritising only the sickest patients; some clinics have stopped
out-patient treatment. Widespread cessation of continuation and
maintenance ECT has led to recurrence of severe illness, and delays in
initiating acute courses have resulted in worse patient outcomes,
particularly in life-threatening illness. Admissions and even formal
detentions in hospital have occurred or been lengthened as a
consequence.

.. _sec3-1:

Recommendations
---------------

Looking to the near future, it is imperative that ECT services remain
functional even if there is a second wave of COVID-19 infections this
winter. Guidance published in September 2020 jointly by four anaesthesia
organisations in the UK\ :sup:`7` takes a pragmatic approach towards
COVID-19 risk stratification that might prove helpful in increasing
patient turnover. Crucially, it asserts that in-patients who are
regularly tested for the virus and are on wards where COVID-19 patients
are not being treated should be considered low risk. Previously only a
small minority of out-patients who were shielding at home and regularly
tested for the virus had been considered low risk. For treatment of
low-risk patients, staff need wear only basic PPE (an apron, gloves and
a surgical mask, with consideration of eye protection), usual recovery
areas can be used and treatment rooms do not require full cleaning
between patients.\ :sup:`7`

However, patients in medium- and high-risk groups will continue to
present for ECT. Some clinics may require improvements in ventilation to
facilitate faster throughput of such patients. It is essential that any
shut-down clinics be reopened without delay, following liaison between
infection control, anaesthesia and ECT staff. Psychiatric staff must
work closely with anaesthesia colleagues to develop pathways enabling
out-patients to access ECT, including regular fast-track virus testing.

It would be all too easy, with the benefit of hindsight, to criticise
decisions made at the outset of the pandemic to redeploy anaesthetists,
en masse, in anticipation of a surge in ICU usage of far greater
magnitude than ultimately occurred. But it is important that the same
situation does not recur and that staff are pulled from delivering ECT
only if ICUs have a genuine need for the personnel and careful
consideration of the balance of negative outcomes concludes that such
action is unavoidable. PPE must be kept available. Lastly, the need to
lengthen or widen ECT lists into afternoon sessions or on more days of
the week must be seriously considered by healthcare providers, with job
planning and prioritisation of staffing for ECT services made to
facilitate this.

We thank Eve Blanchard and Sinead Rogers of the ECT Accreditation
Service for organising and collating the results of the survey and
Professor George Kirov for his suggestions regarding this paper.

**Richard Braithwaite** is a consultant psychiatrist with Isle of Wight
NHS Trust, at St Mary's Hospital, Newport, Isle of Wight, and vice-chair
of the Special Committee on Electroconvulsive Therapy and Related
Treatments at the Royal College of Psychiatrists, London, UK. **Robert
Chaplin** is Clinical Lead for Accreditation in the College Centre for
Quality Improvement, Royal College of Psychiatrists, London, UK. **Vimal
Sivasanker** is a consultant psychiatrist with Hertfordshire Partnership
University NHS Foundation Trust, at Kingsley Green, Radlett, and chair
of the Electroconvulsive Therapy Accreditation Service Advisory Group,
Royal College of Psychiatrists, London, UK.

.. _sec-das1:

Data availability
=================

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding author on reasonable request.

R.B. analysed the data and wrote the initial draft manuscript. R.C. was
involved in designing the study, wrote the draft abstract and revised
the manuscript. V.S. was involved in designing the study and revised the
manuscript. All authors gave final approval of the version to be
published and agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors, but the survey was facilitated by
employees of the Royal College of Psychiatrists, London.

.. _nts5:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. [1]
   ECT, electroconvulsive therapy; COVID-19, coronavirus disease 2019;
   PPE, personal protective equipment.

.. [2]
   Multiple responses were allowed for these questions.

.. [3]
   These options were not listed in the March 2020 version of the
   survey.

.. [4]
   ‘Other’ category included clinic/theatre space or equipment needed by
   another service, and staff being redeployed to other areas.

.. [5]
   ‘Other’ category included patients being treated at a neighbouring
   clinic, and list length reduced to allow time for use of PPE and
   decontamination of facilities between patients.
