===========================================================================================================================
Timeliness and Quality of Response to Referrals Received by a Psychiatry Liaison Service for Older Adults During a Pandemic
===========================================================================================================================



Nirja Beehuspoteea
Robyn-Jenia Wilcha
Amelia Edwards
Agnes Mbazira*Presenting author.
:Date: 2022-06

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims
      :name: sec_a1

   To improve timeliness of response and provide a committed plan to
   referrals received by the liaison service for older adults in Croydon
   University Hospital. Background: A quality improvement project in
   2019 aimed to evaluate effectiveness of the liaison referral pathway.
   A questionnaire distributed to ward staff revealed some comments
   regarding ‘non-committal advice’ given by the liaison team.

   .. rubric:: Methods
      :name: sec_a2

   Data were collected from 44 referrals received by the liaison team in
   June 2021. Variables included referral date, reason for referral,
   date of first assessment, plan documented in the notes, date and
   details of committed plan of action.

   Multi-disciplinary team (MDT) discussion identified that more
   committed advice could be provided by the following, which were
   implemented at the start of September 2021. Huddle at the start of
   each day to triage and allocate referrals to appropriate members of
   MDT. Prompt discussions with senior members of the team following
   assessment to discuss diagnosis and management.Team teaching sessions
   were organised once a week, in the form of case-based discussions and
   role play, to improve communication skills, confidence and
   history-taking.Data were then collected from 48 referrals received in
   September and October 2021.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a3

   Of the 44 patients in June, average time taken from point of referral
   to assessment was 1.27 days and to providing a concrete plan 1.80
   days.

   Of the 48 patients between end of September and October, average time
   to assessment was 1.31 days and to providing a concrete plan 1.88
   days.

   In June, 75% of patients were seen on same day or within one day and
   50% had a concrete plan within one day.

   In September/October, 65% of patients were seen on same day or within
   one day and 52% had a concrete plan within one day.

   .. rubric:: Conclusion
      :name: sec_a4

   These results highlight that assessments by older adult liaison
   service require detailed collateral history, investigations and MDT
   discussions.

   While ‘obtain collateral history’ may not seem as committed a plan as
   prescribing medication, it remains an important part of old age
   psychiatry.

   Given the rapid turnover of patients and increased pressures during
   the pandemic, it is the responsibility of the liaison team to
   communicate effectively with the wards and offer a timeline for
   completion of plan.

   Following above changes, another questionnaire has been sent to
   request feedback on effectiveness of the liaison team.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
