=================================================================================================================
‘Choose Psychiatry’ goes virtual: experiences and learning from the online 2020 National Psychiatry Summer School
=================================================================================================================



Patricia Vinchenzo
Nikki Nabavi
Derek K. TracyCorrespondence to Patricia Vinchenzo
(pvinchenzo01@qub.ac.uk)
:Date: 2022-06

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   COVID-19 has forced many educational events to go ‘virtual’. We
   report on the first online student-run National Psychiatry Summer
   School (NPSS). Evaluation of the online format and content was
   undertaken through survey feedback from almost 400 attendees.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   The NPSS positively affected attendees’ perceptions of psychiatry as
   a career choice. The virtual format was positively received, with
   benefits including breaking down traditional barriers of geography
   and cost.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Post-COVID-19, a hybrid future of mixed virtual and face-to-face
   events is likely. Our work shows the viability of this and unique
   gains it might offer, and offers experiential learning on challenges
   encountered for others who wish to trial further virtual conferences.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
COVID-19 has presented many changes, including a rapid move to virtual
teaching.\ :sup:`1` Online conferences have become the ‘new normal’,
providing numerous new challenges and opportunities for medical
education.\ :sup:`2` ‘Choose Psychiatry’ initiatives by the Royal
College of Psychiatrists (RCPsych) have also adapted to these changes.
The National Psychiatry Summer School (NPSS) was one such event, planned
from the outset as a virtual event with RCPsych sponsorship and
successfully hosted online over 2 days in July 2020. To our knowledge,
it was the first virtual summer school led by medical students with
collaboration across devolved nations of the UK.

The NPSS had three primary aims: (a) to promote psychiatry as a career;
(b) to help compensate for clinical placements lost during the pandemic;
(b) to reduce geographical, financial and time-frame barriers to
attendance. The first of these has been a common theme for other
initiatives.\ :sup:`3` However, the other two reflect innovative
attempts to offset losses accrued during the COVID-19 pandemic and tap
into novel opportunities from this disruption. Two secondary aims were
to explore underrepresented subspecialties within the undergraduate
curriculum and to evidence high-quality medical student-led initiatives.

We report the practicalities and learning from hosting this online
event, present feedback data on the content and novel format, and offer
proposals for the future optimisation of student engagement and
recruitment through technology. We also consider the future of
advancement of hybrid models and events that will likely combine virtual
and face-to-face aspects, much of which is applicable to other online
conferences.

.. _sec1:

Method
======

Free-text feedback and ratings on a range of questions were collected on
both days of the NPSS and a total of 726 feedback forms were completed
(383 for day 1 and 343 for day 2), accounting for just over 81% of
attendees. Merging the survey data produced a total of 379 responses.

Participants gave informed consent for their anonymised data to be
subsequently analysed and disseminated in future research and
promotional materials. Ethical approval was not required as the purpose
of the study was to evaluate and improve a service. No formal research
methodology was used beyond descriptive analysis of the survey data.

.. _sec1-1:

Survey data collection
----------------------

The majority of attendees were based in the UK (347/379); of those
specifying a country, 7 were from Wales, 15 from Northern Ireland, 28
from Scotland and 87 from England. International attendees came from (1
from each country unless otherwise stated): Albania, Brunei (2), Canada,
Egypt, Hungary, India (2), Ireland (2), Kuwait, Malaysia, Oman, Pakistan
(3), Poland, Romania, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates (3).

In total, 215 attendees were current medical students, 104 were sixth
form students, 13 were doctors and 33 were current/post-graduate
students in other fields, including biomedical sciences and psychology.

.. _sec1-2:

Feedback responses
------------------

Attendees were asked to rate (on a scale of 0–10) how likely they were
to choose a career in psychiatry/mental health before and after the
event. The mean score increased from 5.66 (s.d. = 2.61) to 7.31
(s.d. = 1.95) (`Fig. 1 <#fig01>`__). They also completed a six-point
questionnaire on various aspects of the event (`Table 1 <#tab01>`__).
Feedback was very positive for the event; for example, across the 379
survey responses, over 99% of attendees ‘strongly agreed’ or ‘agreed’
that the presenters appeared enthusiastic about the subject and over 98%
of attendees ‘strongly agreed’ or ‘agreed’ that, overall, this event was
high quality. Fig. 1Attendee likelihood rating (a) before and (b) after
event. Table 1Subjective attendee (*n* = 379) ratings of the 2020
National Psychiatry Summer SchoolProportion of attendees selecting each
response, %StatementStrongly agreeAgreeNeutralDisagreeStrongly
disagree‘The presenters appeared enthusiastic about the
subject’84.9614.250.5300.26‘Overall, this event was of a high
quality’79.9518.730.530.530.26‘The event was well
organised’86.8112.140.530.260.26‘This event was successful in promoting
psychiatry’75.9922.960.7900.26‘The event length was
adequate’56.7333.517.921.580.26‘There were enough breaks during the
day’38.7940.6311.877.920.79

.. _sec1-3:

Free-text survey responses
--------------------------

Formal qualitative methods were not used, but free text was used to
identify key themes in feedback from attendees. In total, 180/331
respondents from day 1 and 132/297 from day 2 provided qualitative
free-text feedback. Attendees were asked whether there were ‘any other
topics you wished we had covered?’. Popular responses included (but were
not limited to) ‘Child and adolescent psychiatry’, ‘Perinatal
psychiatry’, ‘Addiction psychiatry’, ‘LGBTQ mental health’,
‘Intellectual disability psychiatry’, ‘Psychotherapy’ and ‘Patients with
lived experience’. Other responses referred to specific disorders or
topics covered on day 2.

Attendees were asked to provide feedback to help improve future events,
from which we identified 20 major themes: 10 on the format of the online
event (`Table 2 <#tab02>`__) and 10 on its content (`Table
3 <#tab03>`__). Table 2Major themes regarding the online format of the
2020 National Psychiatry Summer School identified from qualitative data
analysisFormat themeExample quoteAccessibility‘The fact that it was free
and I was able to attend despite being from […] was very useful.’ (Theme
1)Medical student hosts‘I feel that the hosts played a massive part in
making the day enjoyable and the way they went about changing it to suit
the audience's needs, like the sixth former talk during lunchtime, would
be something I am very thankful for. I am very inspired by the two of
them.’ (Theme 2)Quality‘The event was incredibly well organised and done
so much more professionally and with fewer technical problems than other
virtual conferences arranged by larger organisations with more qualified
staff.’ (Theme 3)Organisation ‘I think the day was very well organised,
it was truly one of the best events I have attended.’ (Theme
4)Technology‘It was amazing that you stuck to time and covered such a
breadth of topics with speakers who were confident using the technology
and extremely passionate about their subject areas.’ (Theme 5)Social
media use‘It was great to get a good conversation going on Twitter –
almost like networking (but not quite!).’ (Theme
6)Interactivity‘Although difficult to do, I think the talks could've
been more interactive i.e. using the poll/voting tools available on
Zoom.’ (Theme 7)Providing post-event resources‘Perhaps in future (with
the permission of the speaker of course) it would be possible to record
sessions so if some people are not able to make it they would be able to
watch at a later date.’ (Theme 8)Target audience‘Perhaps there could
have been different sessions available at different times/in breakout
rooms at the end depending what stage you were in that you could choose
to attend.’ (Theme 9)Zoom fatigue‘I would have wanted would be maybe a
couple more breaks, just couldn't bear to miss any talks yet my eyes are
definitely aching after a long day of screen-staring.’ (Theme 10) Table
3Major themes on the content of the 2020 National Psychiatry Summer
School identified from qualitative data analysisContent themeExample
quoteSpeakers‘Very well delivered webinars, speakers extremely
interesting, enthusiastic, and knowledgeable about their subjects.’
(Theme 11)Diversity‘Diverse range of topics, and very glad to see that
topics that aren't addressed enough (Islamophobia, Race, Equality) are
being discussed and we can learn how, as medical students, to tackle
these in healthcare and in our daily lives.’ (Theme 12)Representation of
subspecialties‘I think the timetable has been very well developed to
cover a wide variety of interesting topics that are otherwise neglected
on many medical school's psychiatry curriculums’ (Theme 13)Lived
experience‘Hearing about people's real lived experiences of mental
health and working within the sector was really inspiring.’ 14Patient
simulation‘I enjoyed the actor scenario and use of patient scenarios in
the second and third lectures of the day. I always find this useful to
put the information being given into the context of the real clinical
world.’ (Theme 15)Interest for non-psychiatrists‘I loved it all, and
that's coming from someone not actually pursuing psychiatry as an
occupation.’ (Theme 16)Compensation for lost experiences‘Attending this
summer school has re-lit the excitement in me about applying to medical
school which seemed to have died down a bit in lockdown.’ (Theme
17)Earlier exposure‘At the University of […], we have psychiatry
placements in our final year which were initially supposed to be early
next year for me! It was great to get exposure to the speciality through
the conference.’ (Theme 18)Choose Psychiatry‘I had slight doubts about
choosing psychiatry but no more, this event has only deepened my passion
for this career.’ (Theme 19)College engagement‘I hope you offer a summer
school like this in future, and all the Royal [medical] colleges should
do the same. I will look at signing up to the RCPsych now!’ (Theme 20)

.. _sec2:

Discussion
==========

.. _sec2-1:

Practicalities of running the virtual 2020 NPSS
-----------------------------------------------

Psychiatry summer schools are one of the UK's Choose Psychiatry
initiatives and one of many enrichment activities encouraging students
to choose psychiatry.\ :sup:`4` The first UK psychiatry summer school
took place in 2009, organised by King's College London.\ :sup:`5` These
free-of-charge educational experiences have since expanded nationally
(hosts have included Liverpool, Wessex and Leeds), ranging from one day
to full week programmes.

The 2020 NPSS was not designed to make a profit, and funding for the
online platform was provided by the RCPsych. The event was instigated,
co-organised and co-hosted by the two medical student authors (P.V and
N.N), who were PsychSoc Presidents at their respective universities,
Queen's University Belfast and the University of Manchester, during this
period. The programme was organised within approximately 1 month. It
featured 18 diverse, eminent and award-winning doctors from a range of
UK geographical locations, including RCPsych faculty staff. Thought was
given to selecting speakers from subspecialties typically
underrepresented on the undergraduate medical curriculum, such as eating
disorders and global forensic psychiatry (`Fig. 2 <#fig02>`__). Speakers
were ultimately recruited based on the organisers’ personal professional
networks and experience of seeing speakers at previous face-to-face
events. No speaker charges were incurred. The decision to use Zoom Video
Webinar was made based on the hosts’ previous experience using the
platform, which has control functions and security that allow attendees
and panellists different privileges (speakers can share slides, sound
and video without risk of interruption from the audience and it protects
against the new phenomenon of ‘Zoom bombing’). For the NPSS, a
500-participant webinar license (£134.40 for that month) was added onto
a pre-existing PsychSoc Zoom Pro meetings account (£14.39 a month). Fig.
2National Psychiatry Summer School 2020 programme.

Before the programme's release the event was advertised on Facebook,
Twitter and Instagram using Queen's University Belfast and Manchester
PsychSoc social media accounts. The event was open to all interested,
including sixth formers as well as medical students. In total, 480
tickets, all free of charge, were available per day, with no
restrictions or limitations in numbers by university or school. In
total, 1029 expressed initial ‘interest’ in attending on Facebook, and
the Eventbrite event page had 9747 views. Tickets were limited by Zoom
platform capacity, and on both occasions all tickets were ‘sold out’
within 12 h. Tickets were released in two batches: the first on 29 June
and the second 13 July 2020. The full programme was released on 11 July.

The 2020 NPSS had a total of 434 attendees log in overall on day 1 and
412 attendees on day 2.

.. _sec2-2:

The online format: digital advantages and challenges
----------------------------------------------------

The 2020 NPSS has demonstrated that moving conferences online creates
new challenges to overcome but can provide exciting novel opportunities.
Organising a successful online conference can typically be achieved in a
shorter time frame than similar in-person events. Once a suitable
platform is chosen, there is no need to book a venue, catering,
accommodation and so forth, and focus is solely on assembling the best
possible programme. In comparison, the annual National Student
Psychiatry Conference receives a minimum funding of £1500. Organisers
are no longer constrained by geographical barriers (travel reimbursement
costs and far greater time commitments) and the speaker pool is
therefore much wider, time-zone permitting.

Moving conferences online can increase medical student and sixth form
attendance and early career engagement, both nationally and
internationally. Attendance at the NPSS overall was higher than at
previous in-person National Student Psychiatry Conferences. Virtual
forums can hold a greater capacity than a physical space at a much lower
cost. The NPSS ‘sold’ 480 tickets. In comparison, previous National
Student Psychiatry Conferences have sold approximately 122 tickets
(Brighton and Sussex, 2018), 130 (Cardiff, 2019) and 156 (Bristol,
2020); historically, medical students from the host institution form the
largest proportion of attendees at these face-to-face events. Cost
access barriers to events are also overcome; attendees no longer incur
travel expenses and can instead attend from the comfort of their own
homes (theme 1 in `Table 2 <#tab02>`__), and attendance was particularly
high for students from all three devolved nations when compared with the
aforementioned conferences. The removal of travel costs, alongside the
cost of accommodation, tickets and so forth contributes to an overall
cost reduction for each attendee, helping to reach prospective doctors
and future psychiatrists, especially in hard-to-recruit areas, and
students from less advantaged backgrounds.

Attendees valued having medical student hosts and organisers (`Table
2 <#tab02>`__, theme 2). Prior to COVID-19 restrictions, collaboration
between PsychSocs from two different countries was rare; but
collaboration pooled perspectives from two institutions and networks,
for both advertising and speaker recruitment. Consequently, there was an
overall increased awareness of PsychSocs as a whole, and we predict
future increase in medical student engagement with their local
PsychSocs.

The quality and standard of an in-person event does not appear to have
been lost – as reported in feedback (`Table 2 <#tab02>`__, theme 3).
This included appreciation of keeping to programme timings, day
structure and excellent organisation (theme 4). The hosts prompted the
speakers on their available time and the appropriate number of audience
questions, which was greatly valued by the audience, with comments such
as ‘The event was incredibly well organised and done so much more
professionally and with fewer technical problems than other virtual
conferences arranged by larger organisations with more qualified staff’
(theme 3).

There are, however, challenges with online learning. Practice runs
increased speaker confidence and minimised technical difficulties on the
day, but the schedule was also purposefully designed to allow for some
speaker delays and yet remain on time (`Table 2 <#tab02>`__, theme 5).
Even with such precautions we experienced some technical difficulties on
the day, including joining an online platform with inadequate internet
connection or from a hospital/clinical trust from which access was
blocked.

The attendees also appreciated the ‘buzz’ the conference had on Twitter
(`Table 2 <#tab02>`__, theme 6). The NPSS ensured that all the speakers’
Twitter handles were made available to the attendees by displaying them
on the screen in breaks.

Audience capacity varies across online platforms and payment schemes.
Online free events may attract higher rates of ticket reservation, as
attendees face no financial loss in not attending. Some who booked
tickets did not attend and, conversely, some wished to attend but were
not able to as all tickets had ‘sold out’. Organisers may wish to
oversell ticket capacity, but to what extent this should be done is
debatable, as there may be a risk of reaching attendee capacity on your
platform and leaving some disappointed, particularly if there are some
more popular talks from high-profile speakers. Several organisations
livestream events across platforms but this may not be suitable for all.
Interaction between attendees was limited, as the ‘chat’ function was
disabled (`Table 2 <#tab02>`__, theme 7) because neither organiser had
enough time to monitor this while managing other tasks.

We propose that recordings and slides should be made available to
attendees following an event, but permission from each speaker must be
sought and sensitive information removed (`Table 2 <#tab02>`__, theme
8). It has been suggested that distributing recordings post-event may
reduce live attendance, but the extent of this is unknown. The use of
breakout rooms and opportunities they can provide are limitless: perhaps
icebreaker games, debates or concurrent workshops, which can allow for
interactivity between attendees (but require a larger organisation
committee to manage). Breakout rooms can target specific audiences, for
example ‘psychiatry at medical school’ or ‘psychiatry within the
foundation programme’ (`Table 2 <#tab02>`__, theme 9). Overall, we
recommend targeting medical student and sixth form students separately
to help meet the differing expectations and knowledge of these two
groups while maintaining relevance, as shown by Wyke and
colleagues.\ :sup:`6`

The length of the day and sessions should be considered: day 2 feedback
suggests that sufficient activity-free breaks are welcomed and should be
scheduled within the event programme (we had one additional break on the
day 2 programme) to prevent ‘Zoom fatigue’ (`Table 2 <#tab02>`__, theme
10). Overall, attendance reduced throughout the day, but joining
remotely provides attendees with flexibility to ‘dip in and out’ of the
event, only attending for speakers they wish to hear.

.. _sec2-3:

The content: maintaining quality speakers and topics in a ‘saturated marketplace’
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Diverse, passionate and knowledgeable speakers are essential to convey
the ethos of Choose Psychiatry (`Table 3 <#tab03>`__, theme 11).
Attendees noted and appreciated the importance of the presented topics,
including lived experience (theme 14), topics less commonly addressed
(such as Islamophobia, race and equality) (theme 12) and subspecialties
neglected on many medical schools’ psychiatry curriculums (theme 13).
Attendees highlighted appreciation for the two medical student
presentations (by P.V and N.N.), which were described as ‘more
relatable’ and ‘easier to digest’. Virtual conferences may offer junior
colleagues significantly more opportunities to present, and raising the
voices of doctors from a variety of clinical standings and locations is
equally important. Interactivity throughout the course of the two days
included several speakers opting to include audience polls, as well as
taking questions from the audience both during and after their talks. In
addition, there was patient simulation, where Dr Fernando had invited an
actor to play the patient while a medical student took their history
(theme 15). Varying the options for student interaction, utilising
audience polling, question platforms, chat features and the previously
discussed breakout rooms are reported to maximise student engagement
online.\ :sup:`7`

Feedback further highlighted the importance of patients’ mental health
problems for all healthcare workers, not just prospective psychiatrists
(`Table 3 <#tab03>`__, theme 16). For any medical specialty, it is vital
for medical students to consider the mental health of their patients:
parity of esteem and valuing mental health equally with physical health
were key takeaway messages from the NPSS.

The 2020 NPSS was for some their first experience of psychiatry and/or
medical education as a whole, as noted by the unanticipated but welcome
large sixth form presence (not seen at past National Student Psychiatry
Conferences). Feedback demonstrated how virtual events compensated for
lost work experience and provided support for applications to medical
school (`Table 3 <#tab03>`__, theme 17). Further support included
providing medical students (a proportion of whom had psychiatry
rotations cancelled or reduced because of COVID-19) with an insight into
the specialty. Furthermore, the NPSS provided earlier, accessible
psychiatry education to medical students who otherwise experience
psychiatry rotations later in undergraduate clinical years (theme 18).
Virtual psychiatry events may therefore help to mitigate the concerns
regarding reduced psychiatry teaching and in turn engender future
interest and boost recruitment.\ :sup:`8`

Lastly, the NPSS helped some students to consider pursuing psychiatry as
a career (`Table 3 <#tab03>`__, theme 19), a notion further strengthened
by ‘before and after’ ratings (`Fig. 2 <#fig02>`__). Following the
event, there was a clear demand for future similar events and
maintaining accessibility. Advertising these opportunities (such as
becoming an associate member of the RCPsych) during programme breaks
might sustain engagement and long-term recruitment (theme 20).

.. _sec3:

Conclusions
===========

COVID-19 created a need for online educational learning.\ :sup:`2` Our
survey data showed that the 2020 National Psychiatry Summer School had a
positive impact on attendees’ perceptions of psychiatry as a career
choice, and demonstrated how virtual medical education events can
successfully engage large audiences while simultaneously reducing the
historical geographical and financial barriers to beyond-curriculum
teaching. The survey showed that the virtual format was positively
received by our attendees.

The full potential of virtual events has yet to be fully realised, with
a continuous evolution of, and learning from, innovative formats. Future
work may further inform us of the benefits of virtual medical education
events, and more formal qualitative and quantitative methods may be
employed.

We believe there may be scope to run events that specifically target,
engage and encourage sixth form students from all backgrounds; ‘schools
only’ events offer a strong and fruitful possibility for
psychiatry.\ :sup:`6` Although these virtual events offer a myriad of
opportunities, such as increasing access for medical students in the
UK's devolved nations, it is important to recognise that they
simultaneously reduce the networking opportunities. Post-COVID, the
progress we have made with eco-friendly, online alternatives should not
be lost, without compromising important aspects of face-to-face meetings
that act as a ‘social glue’ in terms of networking.\ :sup:`9` Events are
most likely to encompass hybrid models and discussion remains on how
these can be best utilised within psychiatry, medical education,
recruitment and engagement. We must also recognise the risk of only
certain groups being able to attend the in-person parts of hybrid
events, with other groups ‘excluded’ from the social element of the
events when attending virtually.

We thank Clare Wynn-Mackenzie, Royal College of Psychiatrists Careers
Manager, for her support and advice, the Royal College of Psychiatrists
for its support.

**Patricia Vinchenzo** is a medical student at Queen's University
Belfast School of Medicine, Dentistry and Biomedical Sciences, UK.
**Nikki Nabavi** is a medical student at the University of Manchester,
Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, UK. **Derek K. Tracy** is a
consultant psychiatrist and Clinical Director at Oxleas NHS Foundation
Trust, London, and a senior lecturer in the Department of Psychosis
Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's
College London, UK.

.. _sec-das1:

Data availability
=================

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding author, P.V., upon reasonable request.

All authors met all four ICMJE criteria for authorship, jointly
conceiving the study, writing the draft article and approving the final
article.

The Royal College of Psychiatrists funded the purchase of the online
platform account, via a one-off grant and a portion of its annual
funding to the UK's PsychSocs. The research presented in this article
received no specific grant from any funding agency, commercial or
not-for-profit sectors.

.. _nts5:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.
