==========================================
Lynn Sinclair Gillis, MB ChB, MD, FRCPsych
==========================================



Joan Raphael-Leff

:date: 2021-06


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
**Formerly Head of the Department of Psychiatry, University of Cape
Town, and consultant psychiatrist, Groote Schuur Hospital, Cape Town,
South Africa**

Lynn Gillis, who died recently at the age of 96 years, was, over a long
period, one of the leaders of academic psychiatry in South Africa. In
the 1960s and 1970s, he was a pioneer of community psychiatry and set up
numerous community psychiatry services, mostly led by nurses. Under his
guidance, a day hospital was established in 1963 in Cape Town, allied to
a community service and psychiatric social club, which promoted
continuity of care for patients in the community. This linked outreach
provisions with psychiatric advocacy, aiming to destigmatise mental
illness. Out-patient clinics were established at most hospitals and
peripheral clinics in many parts of the country, which catered mostly
for patients who had been discharged from hospital. Later legislation in
1976 made formal provision for a community service in country areas
associated with particular psychiatric hospitals. Over time, an active
Division of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry was established in Cape
Town's Red Cross War Memorial Children's Hospital.

Courageously defying apartheid segregation, Lynn integrated staff across
wards. In 1968, he carried out a significant research project into the
rate of mental illness and alcoholism in the multiracial groups of
people in the Cape Peninsula. Later, he organised a community service
for alcoholism, and a specialised geriatric service, the first in South
Africa. In 1980, he was appointed to head the newly established Social
Psychiatry Medical Research Council Unit, which focused on research in
community-based mental health. In collaboration with Professor Julian
Leff of the UK Medical Research Council, he carried out a number of
studies of the social precipitants of relapse in schizophrenia. Their
studies revealed massive discrepancies in the lived experience of the
different racial groups.

Lynn's clinical teaching and research laid the foundations for the
existing Department of Psychiatry at the University of Cape Town, now a
leader of psychiatric research on the African continent. Professor Dan
Stein, the current Head of the Department, recalls that ‘the clinical,
teaching, research, and social responsiveness strengths of the existing
Department are in no small measure due to his pioneering work’. As well
as clinical work and carrying out research, Lynn wrote several books
dealing with different aspects of clinical practice in psychiatry and
psychiatric education. Towards the end of his life he published a series
of reflections on his rich and varied experience.

Lynn was born on 1 February 1924 to Jewish parents who had migrated from
Kretinga in Lithuania. His father, Julius Gillis, was a dentist who grew
competition roses as a hobby. His mother, Annie Gillis (née Lynn), was a
concert pianist who gave music lessons locally. He was first brought up
in the small South African town of Kroonstad in the Orange Free State.
As a result, he spoke vernacular Afrikaans (a language he deemed second
only to Yiddish in its rich array of metaphors and flamboyant curses)
with fluency. At the age of 9 years, a year after the family had moved
to Johannesburg, he contracted scarlet fever. His experience in the
Children's Fever Hospital may have influenced his later ideas about
hospitals as institutions.

He entered Witwatersrand medical school in 1941. He interrupted his
medical studies to enlist as a medical assistant in the South African
Medical Corps, serving in makeshift hospitals in North Africa and Italy.
Returning to South Africa in 1945, he completed his medical studies,
qualifying as a doctor in 1948. After qualification, he worked until
1962 at Tara Hospital, Johannesburg, a pioneering mental health facility
where he was influenced by the indomitable Dr Mary Gordon, a migrant
from Russia. In the 1950s, Lynn took a break from Tara to hold positions
at both the Maudsley Hospital in London and St Francis Hospital,
Haywards Heath in Sussex. In 1962, he was recruited to fill the position
of founding Head of the Department of Psychiatry and Mental Health at
the University of Cape Town and first consultant at Groote Schuur
Hospital (posts he held for 27 years).

During his career, Lynn won numerous awards, among them the Salus Medal
(silver) for Meritorious Service to Medicine (1989) and the Merit Award
for Outstanding Services, Medical Association of South Africa (1990). He
also held many positions of responsibility, including President of the
South African National Council for Mental Health (1969–1970, 1976–1978,
1981–1983) and President of the College of Psychiatrists of South Africa
(1969–1971). He was an elected member of the International Brain
Research Organization (1977–1989), President of the South African
Geriatrics Society (1978–1980), President of the South African
Gerontological Association (1982–1993) and Chairman of the National
Research Programme on Ageing of the South African Population, Human
Sciences Research Council (1987–1991). He was a founding member and
later Fellow of the Royal College of Psychiatrists (1971).

Although a reserved man, Lynn's warmth, compassion and mischievous
humour influenced several generations of psychiatrists, psychologists
and allied practitioners as much as his professional capacities as
inspirational teacher, mentor and author of many publications. He had a
long-lasting effect on his trainees, many of whom rose to eminence in
South Africa, the USA and the UK. Today, they still acknowledge the
lasting legacy of his singularly trusting style of leadership, which
fostered personal initiative. Ever curious, his awareness of the many
contradictions and unconscious processes of the human mind drew Lynn to
psychoanalysis, and he pursued a lifelong interest in Buddhism. He
always had a subtle appreciation of beauty, art and music. In retirement
he studied sculpture and became a prolific creator of many austere
carvings in marble and rare woods. An enthusiastic mountaineer, he
remained remarkably healthy and agile until his last years. He was lucid
and fiercely independent to the end of his full and fulfilled
professional and artistic life. He died on 24 May 2020.

His wife Shirley (née Lurie) died in 2015 after they had been married
for 64 years. One daughter, Susan, died in 2012. He leaves a daughter
Jennifer, four grandchildren and three great grandchildren.
