=============================================================================================================
Developing Inpatient Management Strategies for Behavioural and Psychological Symptoms of Dementia (DIMS-BPSD)
=============================================================================================================

:Author: Jennifer Parker
:Author: Ryan Beazley
:Author: Stephen De Souza*Presenting author.
:Date: 2022-06
:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims
      :name: sec_a1

   This project details the development of a Quality Improvement Project
   aiming to review and improve the management of behavioural and
   psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD) on an old age psychiatry
   ward. BPSD refers to a constellation of non-cognitive symptoms and
   signs which arise in people with dementia, including disturbed
   perception, thought content, mood or behaviour. Examples include
   agitation, depression, apathy, repetitive questioning, psychosis,
   aggression, sleep problems, and socially inappropriate behaviours.
   BPSD arise in 5/6 of people with dementia over the course of their
   illness and are associated with a deterioration in cognition and
   progression in dementia plus secondary harms such as falls and
   hospitalisation. Pyrland Two ward is a mixed gender specialised
   organic old age psychiatry inpatient unit serving the county of
   Somerset. Most patients have a diagnosis of dementia, are being cared
   for using either MHA or MCA legislation and exhibit one or more BPSD.
   There was no structured or formalised approach to the management of
   BPSD at inception.

   .. rubric:: Methods
      :name: sec_a2

   A point-in-time audit was conducted to produce baseline measurements
   of BPSD management on the ward, measured against NICE
   criteria.Plan-Do-Study-Act (PDSA) methodology was employed to
   incorporate incremental quality improvement interventions such as a
   ward-round checklist and staff education.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a3

   Baseline: (n = 14) 4/14 formally diagnosed with BPSD. 6/14 were
   prescribed antipsychotic medications, of which 1/6 fully met NICE
   standards. 2/14 had structured assessment tools used.Results
   following introduction of improvement methods: (n = 8) 8/8 formally
   diagnosed with BPSD. 7/8 were prescribed antipsychotic medications,
   of which 4/7 fully met NICE standards. 7/8 had structured assessment
   tools used.

   .. rubric:: Conclusion
      :name: sec_a4

   It was possible to see modest improvements in the ward-based
   management of BPSD using quality improvement methodology, including
   more favourable psychotropic prescribing. However, total patient
   numbers are small and further interventions, such as more PDSA
   cycles, may add value and encourage sustainability.


pmc
