======================================================================
Undergraduate psychiatric education: current situation and way forward
======================================================================



Gaia Sampogna
Hussien Elkholy
Franziska Baessler
Bulent Coskun
Mariana Pinto da Costa
Rodrigo Ramalho
Florian Riese
Andrea Fiorillo [1]_
:Date: 2022-05

:Abstract:
   Undergraduate psychiatric education is essential for the training of
   medical students and for their recruitment into psychiatry. A
   significant shortage of graduates choosing a career in psychiatry has
   been recently documented, and this trend might have many causes. When
   medical students have positive experiences of teaching, elective
   placements and exposure to psychiatric patients, their attitudes
   towards psychiatry are significantly better. Therefore, there is a
   need to improve the quality of undergraduate training courses in
   psychiatry. Innovative teaching strategies are suggested, including
   the use of movies, virtual reality, simulated patients and
   multiprofessional training wards.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Undergraduate education in mental health is an essential part of the
training of medical students. Given the high prevalence of mental health
problems in the general population, all practitioners should have the
basic skills to identify and manage mental disorders.\ :sup:`1`
According to the World Psychiatric Association (WPA), undergraduate
psychiatric education aims to improve the quality of mental health
education and, consequently, the quality of care provided to people with
mental disorders.

Furthermore, high-quality undergraduate education in psychiatry is
crucial for the future recruitment of medical students into psychiatry
as a specialty. In the past 10–15 years the percentage of graduates
choosing a career in psychiatry has been significantly
reduced.\ :sup:`2` Possible explanations for this negative trend include
the low quality of teaching, stigma towards people with mental disorders
and negative attitudes of medical doctors towards psychiatry.\ :sup:`3`
In particular, it could be that some aspects of the psychiatric
discipline, such as the use of compulsory treatment and the presence of
negative stereotypes attached to psychiatrists, may have an adverse
effect on both recruitment and retention of medical students in
psychiatry.\ :sup:`3–5` In some European countries, students may
consider a placement in psychiatry as ‘low priority’.\ :sup:`6`

However, students’ attitudes towards the discipline change if they have
positive teaching experiences, elective placements and direct contact
with patients with mental disorders. Several strategies have been
proposed for improving the attitudes of medical students towards
psychiatry. These include direct contact with patients (particularly
those who get better after treatment), an emphasis on the evidence-based
treatments and approaches used in psychiatry, and a close relationship
with consultants and senior trainees during their education. Therefore,
to overcome stigma and the negative image of the discipline, in 2009,
the Royal College of Psychiatrists in the UK suggested organising
periodic meetings between medical students and licensed psychiatrists
throughout medical school and the development of an *ad hoc* mentoring
programme.\ :sup:`7`

Furthermore, receiving an adequate undergraduate psychiatric education
may be useful not only for students interested in psychiatry, but it
could also help those who want to pursue a different medical career. In
particular, undergraduate psychiatric education may teach them the
communication skills, and explain concepts and thought processes
necessary to understand patients and their disorders from biological,
psychological and sociocultural viewpoints.

Improving the quality of undergraduate education can support the process
of de-stigmatisation of psychiatry, since medical students can develop
correct and unbiased opinions regarding the discipline, which in turn
can play a significant role in ameliorating the healthcare services
provided to patients with mental health problems (or related physical
complaints) in other medical settings.

Taking a worldwide perspective, this paper aims to: (a) describe the
characteristics of undergraduate training in psychiatry; (b) discuss the
most relevant unmet needs of undergraduate training in psychiatry in
medical schools; (c) outline some innovative strategies to improve
undergraduate psychiatric education.

.. _sec1:

Characteristics of undergraduate training in psychiatry
=======================================================

Undergraduate psychiatric training greatly varies across different
countries and university sites. Some medical schools include psychiatry
programmes as optional, and others have only 2 weeks of mandatory formal
training in psychiatry.\ :sup:`8` A recent survey promoted by the
International Federation of Medical Students’ Associations (IFMSA) in
collaboration with the WPA noted that psychiatry education is mandatory
in 81 out of the 83 surveyed countries, and is an elective course only
in two countries (Ethiopia and Nigeria).\ :sup:`9` Furthermore, the
duration of classes on theory significantly varies across countries
(e.g. from just 1 day to more than 30 days); Nigeria and Burkina Faso do
not have any practical classes at all. Even in Western countries, some
medical schools offer only 4 weeks of training in psychiatry.\ :sup:`9`
Undergraduate psychiatric training in the USA is longer than it is in
Asian and Pacific regions. Methods for evaluating students’ knowledge
and competencies also vary among countries, although the most common way
of assessing it is multiple choice questions. The format of teaching
does not significantly vary, with most medical schools offering a
combination of lectures, bedside teaching and computer-based
learning.\ :sup:`8` Overall, the survey conducted by IFMSA shows that
undergraduate psychiatric education is not given enough prominence in
undergraduate medical curricula.

.. _sec2:

Unmet needs and the way forward for undergraduate training in psychiatry
========================================================================

A number of unmet needs in undergraduate psychiatric education have
recently been highlighted in the literature. In particular, the limited
availability of tutors, highly trained faculty members and clinicians at
several sites is adversely affecting the quality of provided and
perceived undergraduate training.\ :sup:`10`

Second, in some contexts, limited resources are a significant obstacle
to good-quality training, especially in relation to access to adequate
facilities and evidence-based educational materials.

Many traditional educational methods are not easily applied in
undergraduate psychiatric education (e.g. some patients may be reluctant
to disclose their mental problems to students because of delusional
thoughts; others may feel that the presence of a third person breaks the
therapeutic alliance with their psychotherapist). Furthermore, in many
sites, students have limited access to psychiatric patients at the
bedside, and thus gain little practical knowledge of many psychiatric
disorders.\ :sup:`11`

Therefore, novel methods to teach psychiatry should be put in place and
trialled. It is beyond the scope of this paper to systematically review
all the innovative teaching models used in psychiatry, so we have
selected some of the most promising approaches to outline here.

Simulation techniques offer one innovative solution. Techniques such as
student role-play and simulated patients have been found to improve the
communication skills and empathy of undergraduate medical students and
seem to be very well accepted.\ :sup:`12` These techniques are used to
teach history taking and formulating a management plan and can depict
challenging clinical situations (e.g. acutely agitated patients) or rare
syndromes, which would otherwise be neglected during
training.\ :sup:`13`

Another innovative solution is the use of movies as an educational tool.
Watching movies and videos with students may allow them to discuss
misconceptions about mental disorders in a relaxed setting (i.e. not in
the patient's presence) and whether the clinical descriptions are
accurate or not. Using videos to teach particular topics to medical
students has been shown to result in improved recall of those
situations.\ :sup:`14`

The Psychiatry Early Experience Programme (PEEP) was proposed in 2015 in
the UK. Medical students are paired with specialists in psychiatry, to
shadow them while on-call and for one regular day shift during each of
their jobs.\ :sup:`15` By joining the programme, students are exposed to
a wide range of mental health problems and develop insight into
psychiatric trainees’ work. The students can also attend lectures given
by psychiatric experts and clinical sessions with patients. The
programme looks very promising, as confirmed by the fact that many
students who joined it developed more positive attitudes towards
psychiatry and seemed less reluctant to choose psychiatry as a
specialty.\ :sup:`15`

In 2019, the American Psychiatric Association launched the Psychiatry
Student Interest Group Network (PsychSIGN), a networking initiative that
includes students interested in psychiatry. It provides resources and
mentoring opportunities for students to help them to deepen their
interest in the field.\ :sup:`9,16`

Interprofessional training wards offer another innovative teaching
opportunity. These enable students and trainees from different health
professions to work in collaboration to manage the medical treatment and
rehabilitation of real-life patients, taking a multidisciplinary
perspective.

Finally, another aspect to be improved is related to providing feedback
to medical students at the end of their rotation in psychiatry. A recent
study carried out in Sweden using a structured feedback tool found that
medical students were more satisfied at the end of the rotation period
if they had received structured feedback on their internship.\ :sup:`17`

.. _sec3:

Conclusions
===========

Undergraduate training in psychiatry is essential for psychiatric
education and practice. Providing good-quality undergraduate training
increases students’ interest in mental health, reduces stigma towards
people with mental illness and increases students’ confidence in working
with people with mental health problems.\ :sup:`1–3,18`

Initiatives aiming at improving psychiatric education during the early
years of medical school have been well received and have been found to
be effective in changing the attitudes of medical students towards the
discipline. Novel techniques using virtual reality, movies and
simulation can help increasing the psychiatric knowledge and practical
skills of undergraduate medical students, without affecting patient
confidentiality and the therapeutic alliance.

This work has been conceived within the activities of the WPA Section on
Education in Psychiatry, whose members are acknowledged for their
ongoing commitment and support in improving the quality of undergraduate
education in psychiatry.

.. _sec-das1:

Data availability
=================

Data availability is not applicable to this article as no new data were
created or analysed in this study.

G.S., H.E. and A.F. wrote the first draft of the paper. All authors
revised the paper and approved the final version.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

.. _nts3:

Declaration of interest
=======================

F.B. is supported by an Olympia Morata fellowship of the Medical
Faculty, University of Heidelberg. F.R. received a speaker's honorarium
by Merz and Vifor Pharma unrelated to this work. E.H. and M.P.d.C. are
members of the *BJPsych Bulletin* editorial board and did not take part
in the review or decision-making process of this paper

.. [1]
   The original version of this article was published with an error in
   an author's affiliation. A notice detailing this has been published
   and the error rectified in the online PDF and HTML copies.
