============================================
Michael King, MD, PhD, FRCP, FRCGP, FRCPsych
============================================



Helen KillaspyEmail: h.killaspy@ucl.ac.uk

:date: 2022-06


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Formerly Professor of Psychiatry, University College London, and
Director of the Division of Psychiatry, University College London, UK

Professor Michael King, who died on 10 September 2021 aged 71, made
numerous important contributions in primary care psychiatry, including
risk prediction and the evaluation of complex interventions for mental
disorders. However, his research interests went much further than this.
Always curious and with an insatiable intellectual appetite, he was an
academic polymath, often drawing on approaches from other fields and
applying them to psychiatric research. He was particularly fascinated by
subjects that were difficult to study, such as improving mental health
at the end of life for people with cancer, the role of spiritual beliefs
in mental well-being, and the mental health and stigma experienced by
people from sexual minorities. Michael was a brilliant methodologist and
a prolific researcher, producing almost 800 peer-reviewed publications,
attracting over £45 million in grant income and supervising 30 PhD
students over the course of his career. He was also tremendously
generous and effective in supporting the development of junior clinical
and non-clinical academics, many of whom are leaders in their fields
today.

Michael believed that visibility was key in addressing homophobia in
society and, as an out gay man, he was also a courageous advocate for
the rights of LGBT people, drawing on the scientific evidence to make
his case. In the 1990s he was instrumental in changing how the cause of
death was recorded for victims of AIDS, to mitigate the associated
stigma without compromising the collection of accurate statistics. His
research into male victims of sexual violence influenced the current
legal definition of male rape. He was often called as an expert witness
in cases of child custody involving lesbian and gay parents. He also
gave expert evidence to the Church of England Synod on same-sex marriage
and the ordination of LGBT ministers. In 2001, with Annie Bartlett, he
co-founded the Royal College of Psychiatrists’ LGBT special interest
group (now the Rainbow SIG). Michael contributed hugely to the work of
this group, presenting at numerous conferences and providing wise
counsel to the College on relevant, often contentious, matters of
policy. He was able to remain calm, even when seriously provoked, always
presenting his arguments in an empathic, open and assured way. At the
time of his death, he remained the foremost expert in LGB mental health
in the UK and an international leader in this area. He also weathered a
number of attacks on his reputation as a consequence of his courage in
speaking up for sexual minorities. Although he was not someone who
sought accolades or prizes, he was honoured to be invited to give the
prestigious Beattie Smith lecture at the University of Melbourne in
2017, in recognition of his immense contribution to this field.

Michael was one of two brothers born in Christchurch, New Zealand on 10
February 1950, to Bruce, a farmer, and Patricia King. He completed his
medical studies at the University of Auckland in 1976 before moving to
the UK to train in family practice. In 1981 he began his training in
psychiatry at the Maudsley Hospital, remaining firmly invested not just
in psychiatry but in medicine and primary care throughout his career. He
was awarded Membership and Fellowship of the medical Royal Colleges of
all three specialties. He trained in psychiatric epidemiology at the
General Practice Research Unit of the Institute of Psychiatry and gained
both an MD (University of Auckland 1986) and PhD (University of London
1989) prior to his appointment as senior lecturer in the Department of
Academic Psychiatry at the Royal Free Hospital School of Medicine in
London. He became the Head of Department in 1995 while he was still only
a Reader and, under his energetic and inspiring leadership, the
Department rapidly expanded. Later, when the Medical School became part
of University College London (UCL), he became Director of the UCL
Division of Psychiatry, a role he retained until 2014.

As an adult, Michael learnt Spanish, French and German and developed a
number of long-standing international collaborations, particularly in
South America, Europe, India and Australasia. He was also an excellent
clinician, setting up the psychosexual service at Camden and Islington
NHS Foundation Trust for which he was the consultant psychiatrist for 30
years.

Michael met his life partner, Professor Irwin Nazareth, in 1984 at the
Gay Medical Association. They celebrated their civil partnership in 2006
and married in 2017. In 2019 he contracted a rare non-tuberculous
mycobacterium (NTM) infection, later found to be connected to the
extremely rare lung condition pleuroparenchymal fibroelastosis, from
which he died. As was typical of his approach to life, finding that no
patient support group existed, he established one, NTM Patient Care UK
(`www.ntmpatientcare.uk <www.ntmpatientcare.uk>`__). Michael is survived
by Irwin, two nieces and a nephew. He is very much missed by his family
and by his many friends and colleagues across the world.
