==========================================================
Attitudes toward veganism in eating disorder professionals
==========================================================



Sarah J. Fuller
Kimberley M. Hill

:Correspondence: Sarah Fuller (sarah.fuller@nhs.net)

:date: 2022-04

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   Veganism has increased in popularity in the past decade and, despite
   being a characteristic protected by law, is often viewed negatively
   by the general population. Little is known about the attitudes of
   healthcare professionals despite the potential influence on practice
   and eating disorder patient care. This is one of the first studies to
   investigate attitudes toward veganism within specialist eating
   disorder, general mental health and other professionals.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   A one-way ANOVA indicated all professionals held positive views
   toward veganism. General mental health professionals held
   statistically more positive veganism attitudes than specialist eating
   disorder and other professionals.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   As one of the first studies to suggest eating disorder professionals
   are not biased against veganism, it has important clinical practice
   implications, particularly when exploring motivations for adopting a
   vegan diet (health, weight loss, environmental or animal welfare
   concerns) in patients with eating disorders. Implications for further
   research are provided.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Eating disorders are serious psychiatric conditions characterised by
abnormal eating patterns, either through strict or a lack of control of
eating, and are driven by the over-evaluation of weight and shape
concerns.\ :sup:`1` Research identifies several eating disorder
development risk factors,\ :sup:`2` including, but not limited to,
genetics,\ :sup:`3,4` environmental,\ :sup:`3` female
adolescence,\ :sup:`4` biopsychosocial influences\ :sup:`5` and
urbanisation.\ :sup:`6`

Veganism is a philosophy seeking to exclude using animals and animal
products in all aspects of life, not just diet.\ :sup:`7` It is
estimated that around 1% of the UK population follow a vegan
diet,\ :sup:`8` reflecting a fourfold increase from 2014 to 2019. In the
Western world, the demographics of veganism are predominantly
young,\ :sup:`9` female\ :sup:`10,11` and living in urban
areas.\ :sup:`10,11` Importantly, veganism is protected by law as a
non-religious philosophical belief.\ :sup:`12`

Veganism does not cause eating disorders, but there are similarities
between known eating disorder risk factors and the prevalence data for
veganism. Research suggests the general population are biased against
veganism,\ :sup:`13,14` but it remains unknown if specialist eating
disorder (SED) professionals share these views. SED clinicians may be
concerned about the potentially restrictive nature of vegan diets, and
therefore may potentially be biased against veganism. Given the legal
protection that veganism carries, when exploring the veganism of a
patient with an eating disorder, clinicians must act with
professionalism, respect, curiosity and a lack of personal bias. This is
the first paper to investigate the attitudes of SED, general mental
health (GMH) and other professionals toward veganism

.. _sec1:

Method
======

.. _sec1-1:

Design
------

This self-reported questionnaire study included the following
independent variables: profession (SED, GMH and other professionals),
age (18–29, 30–41, 42–54 and 55–67 years) and gender (male, female and
other). The dependent variable was attitude toward veganism.

.. _sec1-2:

Pilot study
-----------

A pilot study involving three participants from SED, GMH and other
professional groups indicated no adjustments to study measures.

.. _sec1-3:

Measures
--------

Participants completed the General Eating Habits
Questionnaire,\ :sup:`15` scored on a 1 (vegan) to 7 (omnivore) Likert
scale, and the 20-question Attitudes Towards Veganism Survey
(ATvegan),\ :sup:`10` scored on a 1 (negative attitudes) to 7 (positive
attitudes) Likert scale, on Qualtrics (version for Windows;
`www.qualtrics.com <www.qualtrics.com>`__). Cronbach's alpha
(*α* = 0.86) indicated a good level of internal reliability.\ :sup:`11`

.. _sec1-4:

Participants and recruitment
----------------------------

A power analysis (G*Power for Windows, version 3.1.9.7;
https://www.psychologie.hhu.de/arbeitsgruppen/allgemeine-psychologie-und-arbeitspsychologie/gpower.html)
identified *n* = 75 for each professional group, giving a minimum sample
size of 225. Participants were recruited through purposive sampling via
professional networks and social media. A total of 430 responses were
received and data were cleaned to exclude non-UK residents (*n* = 15),
those under 18 or older than 68 years, those not identifying their
professional group (*n* = 3) and vegan participants (*n* = 20), as
research suggested this could bias responses as vegans have an strong
sense of self-identity, which can affect their attitudes on topics
ranging from animal welfare to political affiliation, and this could
affect any findings of the research.\ :sup:`13,16` `Table 1 <#tab01>`__
provides key characteristics of the total sample (*n =* 392). Table
1Participant demographicsGender, *n*\ ProfessionAge group,
yearMaleFemaleDid not saySpecialist eating disorder,
*n* = 11618–29214--30–41733--42–541525--55–68515--General mental health,
*n* = 9018–29418--30–41731142–54515155–6862--Other,
*n* = 18618–29832--30–412655--42–541428--55–68815--

.. _sec1-5:

Procedure
---------

Full ethical approval was obtained and, following written informed
consent, data was collected for 2 weeks during March 2020. Following
completion, participants were debriefed, thanked and provided with
researcher contact details for further questions. Ethical approval was
granted by the University of Northampton's Psychology Ethics Committee
(ethics approval donated by student number: 19432991). All adult
participants provided written informed consent to participate in this
study.

.. _sec1-6:

Analysis
--------

Data was analysed using SPSS version 26 for Windows.

.. _sec2:

Results
=======

An alpha level of 0.05 was used for all statistical tests.

.. _sec2-1:

Profession
----------

Total attitude toward veganism scores were calculated indicating
generally high mean scores and positive attitudes for all professional
groups. This included the GMH (*n* = 90, mean 106.65, s.d. 17.96, range
54–137), SED (*n* = 116, mean 101.49, s.d. 16.13, range 61–136) and
other professionals groups (*n* = 186, mean 101.08, s.d. 18.64, range
43–140).

All parametric assumptions were met. A one-way ANOVA was statistically
significant, indicating a moderate effect size and a positive main
effect of professional group (*F*\ (2, 376) = 3.33, *P* = 0.04,
*η\ p*\ :sup:`2` = 0.02).

*Post hoc* Bonferroni adjustments\ :sup:`14` indicated mean GMH
professionals group scores (mean 106.65 ± 5.72, s.d. 17.96, *P* = 0.04)
were significantly higher and more positive compared with the other
professionals group. No significant difference was evident between the
SED and GMH or other professionals groups.

.. _sec2-2:

Gender
------

Women (*n =* 290, mean 103.36, s.d. 19.24, range 59–140) had slightly
higher mean veganism attitude scores than men (*n* = 100, mean 99.95,
s.d. 17.33, range 43–134), but a Mann–Whitney *U*-test conducted on
non-parametric data indicated no significant difference between women
(median = 104, *n* = 279) and men (median = 101.5, *n* = 98) and
attitude toward veganism scores (*U* = 14 777.00, *z* = 1.19,
*P* = 0.23).

.. _sec2-3:

Age
---

Younger participants aged 18–29 years had higher mean and more positive
attitudes toward vegan scores (*n* = 78, mean 104.48, s.d. 16.74, range
66–138), compared with ages 30–41 years (*n* = 163, mean 102.17, s.d.
18.56, range 43–137), 42–54 years (*n* = 103, mean 102.81, s.d. 16.30,
range 69–140) and 55–68 years (*n* = 48, mean 99.44, s.d. 20.40, range
54–135). However, a one-way ANOVA indicated no significant difference
between participants’ age and their attitude toward veganism score
(*P* = 0.50).

.. _sec3:

Discussion
==========

This study is one of the first to investigate veganism attitudes within
SED, GMH and other professional groups. The aim was to identify whether
the potential bias toward veganism found within the general population
is prevalent within SED professionals. Findings suggested all three
professional groups held positive veganism attitudes, with GMH
professionals holding significantly more positive attitudes than SED and
other professionals. Despite age and gender influencing veganism
attitudes in the general population, no statistically significant age or
gender differences were found within these professional groups.

Research has highlighted a level of bias against veganism within Western
populations,\ :sup:`13,17,18` leading to it being viewed as a minority
group similar to ethnicity or sexual orientation.\ :sup:`18` Not only
are vegans often depicted as going against the status quo of normal
dietary culture, but these attitudes are influenced by gender and age,
with more prominent negative attitudes often found in older, male
generations. As well as investigating whether these biases exist within
SED professional populations, it was hypothesised that SED professionals
would have a more negative view on veganism than other professionals.
This is because SED professionals are aware of how dietary restrictions
can negatively affect an individual's physical health and mental health.
These general attitudes could be reflected in SED professionals’ own
veganism attitudes, and SED professionals should be aware of any such
biases, as they could affect clinical practice and patient treatment. In
2019, a joint consensus statement from the Royal College of
Psychiatrists, the British Dietetic Association and ‘BEAT’, the national
eating disorder charity, was released regarding the importance of
working collaboratively with vegan patients with eating
disorders.\ :sup:`19` This sought to address concerns raised by some
vegan patients that their beliefs were ignored in treatment and that
staff could be biased against veganism. In contrast, the current study
appears to indicate that SED professionals are not biased toward
veganism.

These findings are particularly important because SED professionals may
be concerned when patients presenting with eating disorders make any
significant dietary change before seeking treatment. Self-imposed
dietary restrictions are common in patients with restrictive eating
disorders. These restrictions can be total caloric restriction, but can
also involve excluding entire food groups such as carbohydrates or fats,
or excluding ingredients in foods such as lactose or gluten. It is not
uncommon to see numerous, escalating self-imposed dietary restrictions
as a patient's eating disorder progresses. For example, someone who
previously ate a diet that included meat could become pescatarian, then
vegetarian and finally vegan – with each dietary change becoming more
restrictive. There is evidence that there are increased rates of
vegetarianism in patients with restrictive eating disorders, such as
anorexia nervosa.\ :sup:`20,21` As veganism requires more dietary
restrictions than vegetarianism, researchers suggest that a similar link
could be associated with veganism,\ :sup:`22` which could raise concerns
for SED professionals. Furthermore, SED professionals will be aware of
the overlap in the demographics of veganism and factors that make an
individual more susceptable to an eating disorder.

To adopt a vegan diet, an individual must avoid all animal products,
ingredients or derivatives. Therefore, this requires them to check
dietary labels and will result in the exclusion of foods they previously
ate. These two behaviours, checking labels and food exclusion based on
ingredients, are often seen in patients with restrictive eating
disorders regardless of their overall dietary choice. These firm dietary
rules veganism provides can be very attractive to patients who are
anxious regarding what to eat. Based on the findings of the current
study above, SED professionals do not show a bias against veganism.
However, as research suggests that the general population perceive
multiple barriers to switching to a vegan diet,\ :sup:`23` SED
clinicians may therefore be suspicious of the apparent coincidence of
such a dietary change during the onset of the eating disorder.

.. _sec3-1:

Implications for practice
-------------------------

Findings from this research suggest that SED professionals do not have
more negative views on veganism compared with GMH and other
professionals. Instead, all groups held positive attitudes toward
veganism, with GMH professionals statistically holding the most positive
views. This finding may be partly mediated by participant demographics,
as GMH professional participants tended to be younger women compared
with SED and other professionals. Knowing that SED professionals did not
have a negative attitude toward veganism is important because when
exploring a patient's veganism, the patient may feel vulnerable having a
clinician challenge behaviour that may or may not be associated with
their eating disorder. SED professionals can use this research to
reassure patients that it is their eating disorder that is being
questioned and not their veganism. Taking this dynamic further, it is
important for these professionals to be aware of their ‘social
GRACES’.\ :sup:`24` This acronym was developed for clinicians to be
aware of the many areas in life where we may have conscious or
unconscious bias in clinical work. Using this acronym, there is more
than one topic within each ‘letter’ and the full acronym is
‘GGRRAAACCEEESSS’, encompassing gender, geography, race, religion, age,
ability, appearance, class, culture, ethnicity, education, employment,
sexuality, sexual orientation and spirituality.\ :sup:`24` Clinicians
have both an ethical and legal responsibility to their patients not to
bring any bias into the treatments they offer, if they themselves have
different dietary choices from their patients,\ :sup:`18,24,25` so there
could be a D added to the ‘social GRACES’ – that of diet and dietary
choice.

This research also has a much broader impact as it also reflects that
SED professionals are practicing within relevant legal frameworks. As
veganism is a protected characteristic within the law, these finds are
important.\ :sup:`12,26` If the main hypothesis of this study had been
supported, it would have raised concerns that these professionals’
opinions were significantly different. Going forward, our findings
highlight the need for all SED clinicians to have an awareness of the
nuanced issues veganism can bring for a patient with an eating disorder,
as well as an awareness of the legal protection this characteristic
holds. Navigating this difficult dynamic may be helped by this research,
as it is one of the first studies to consider these issues.

These findings can be generalised to the wider UK SED profession, and
will inform daily clinical practice, particularly as veganism is
becoming more popular nationally.\ :sup:`27` The good response rate and
high completion rates suggest that veganism is a topic of interest for
professionals. Further international research could help generalise
these findings in the wider Western world and globally.

.. _sec3-2:

Limitations
-----------

Bias was minimised by using reversed questions, valid instruments and
measures, but future research in this area should recognise
possibilities for bias. Because of the self-reported nature of this
research, participants may have shown demand characteristics
(participants changing reported behaviours in line with their
interpretation of the study) that may have influenced the findings,
particularly given the potential implications for SED and GMH
professionals. Consequently, participants may have provided what they
perceived as the professionally correct answers,\ :sup:`27,28` or
‘socially desirable’ responses, rather than declaring any strong
personal views to the contrary.\ :sup:`29`

.. _sec3-3:

Future research and conclusions
-------------------------------

Exploring the sensitive dynamic of veganism and eating disorders would
benefit from further research. This includes investigating the extent
that vegan clinicians feel that veganism can be used to facilitate
dietary restriction in patients with eating disorders. Research
targeting vegan SED professionals will provide an unbiased understanding
of how veganism may be used to facilitate dietary restriction in
patients with eating disorders. Although ethically sensitive, future
research could focus on the extent that patients who have recovered from
an eating disorder feel that veganism can be used to facilitate dietary
restriction in eating disorders. Including SED professionals and
patients who have recovered from an eating disorder from a range of
demographics, including age, gender and ethnicity, would allow a more
culturally diverse interpretation of this topic area.

The current research study was targeted at clinicians who work either in
adult, child or adolescent mental health services. These clinicians may
have different attitudes toward veganism when they are working with a
child or an adult, and future research should consider potential
differences here. For example, a 12-year-old girl who is presenting with
a restrictive eating disorder and asking to become vegan for animal
welfare reasons may evoke concerns from clinicians regarding the
authenticity of this dietary change, especially when the nutritional
adequacy of the vegan diet can be hard to achieve in this age group
because of the nutritional demands of growth and puberty.\ :sup:`30` In
contrast, an adult patient following a vegan diet because of a family
history of heart disease may seem less concerning to SED professionals,
and this research did not differentiate between the different
motivations a patient may have. Therefore, future research should
differentiate within the SED group by their area of speciality –
children and young people or adult. Theoretically, an age-informed
professional consensus could be developed, potentially demonstrating
greater concern for younger patients or those who are following an
increasing pattern of dietary restrictions leading to veganism.

In conclusion, veganism is an increasing and legally protected
characteristic, but the general population hold negative attitudes
toward veganism. Research identifies important similarities between
vegan demographics and those at risk of developing an eating disorder.
As a patient's veganism may be challenged as part of their eating
disorder treatment, it is important to identify if SED professionals
hold the same biases, as this could have important implications for
patient care and practice. This is the first study to highlight that SED
professionals do not appear to be biased; in contrast, they hold
positive views toward veganism, as do GMH and other professionals. Not
only does this research suggest that SED professionals are practicing
within the law, but it also indicates that they are aware of their
social GRACES, and perhaps a ‘D’ for ‘diet’ could be added to this
acronym. Further in-depth and more diverse research into professional's
attitudes toward veganism is encouraged.

.. _sec4:

About the authors
=================

**Sarah J. Fuller** is an Advanced Specialist Eating Disorders Dietitian
with the Bedfordshire & Luton CAMHS Eating Disorders Team, East London
NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Kimberley M. Hill** is an Associate
Professor of Psychology with the Faculty of Health, Education and
Society, University of Northampton, UK.

.. _sec5:

Data availability
=================

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding author, S.J.F., upon reasonable request.

The project team included both authors. S.J.F. was the project
investigator, and K.M.H. was the research supervisor.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

.. _nts3:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.
