=========================================================================================
Finding order within the disorder: a case study exploring the meaningfulness of delusions
=========================================================================================



Rosa Ritunnano
Clara Humpston
Matthew R. Broome
:Correspondence: Rosa Ritunnano
(r.ritunnano.1@pgr.bham.ac.uk)

:date: 2022-04

:Abstract:
   Can delusions, in the context of psychosis, enhance a person’s sense
   of meaningfulness? The case described here suggests that, in some
   circumstances, they can. This prompts further questions into the
   complexities of delusion as a *lived* phenomenon, with important
   implications for the clinical encounter. While assumptions of
   meaninglessness are often associated with concepts of ‘disorder’,
   ‘harm’ and ‘dysfunction’, we suggest that meaning can nonetheless be
   found within what is commonly taken to be incomprehensible or even
   meaningless. A phenomenological and value-based approach appears
   indispensable for clinicians facing the seemingly paradoxical
   coexistence of harmfulness and meaningfulness.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
The prevailing clinical view of delusions in the context of psychosis,
as reflected in the cognitive literature, supports the central
proposition that delusions are the result of disturbances of reasoning
and that they represent maladaptive appraisals about the world one
inhabits. Such inferences are often taken to be grossly outside of the
realm of psychological comprehension and, for the most part, inherently
dysfunctional. In some cases, this can lead to prejudiced attributions
of bizarreness, irrationality and meaninglessness. Very few empirical
studies have investigated the relationship between delusions and
meaningfulness. In addition, since the so-called ‘operational
revolution’ in psychiatry, a tendency to focus on notions of disorder,
disability and distress has often led to a reduced attention to issues
of subjectivity, personhood and meaningfulness within the experience of
illness. Through presenting this case study, we wish to bring these
issues back to the fore.

.. _sec1:

The case of Harry, the ‘happiest man in the world’
==================================================

Mr Harry is a 33-year-old gentleman who has been complaining of being
the target of a worldwide conspiracy for the past 5 years. He explains
that one day, he was in his room and he was picking his nose. The
cameras in his room recorded it and this was uploaded to the internet;
now everyone in the world, especially those in the USA, are talking
about it. People in the streets make signs like scratching their nose or
straightening their hair, as an indication to him that they have seen
his videos and know about him. He believes that there is a hierarchy of
people who are taunting him, and this hierarchy goes up to the
Illuminati and the Queen. He thinks that there are lizard people in
charge of the Earth that have made people believe that the Earth is
round, when in fact it is flat and ends at the Arctic and Antarctic
(where there are ice cliffs beyond which we are not allowed to go). He
believes that people are being told lies since the day they are born,
and two- and three-dimensional imagery are used by the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration to fool people into believing what
they see is real, just like in the film ‘The Truman Show’. Harry thinks
that scientists are trying to fool humanity by leading us away from
religion. Satan is taking over the world and the Earth is moving at 6660
miles per hour.

During a consultation with one of the authors (R.R.), Harry explained
how he knows all this: ‘My senses have shown me that nothing is real,
there is nothing outside this world, just infinite space’. These
experiences are unique to him and he feels very special as a result, as
nobody else has access to the truth. He reported watching YouTube videos
that have proven all his theories, and now fully understands what the
world is really like. He is the happiest man in the world and states
that every day is filled with novelty and excitement. Harry finds it
surprising that people are blind to all this, and have nothing better to
do in their lives than following him around, listening to his thoughts
and controlling him. However, he has now learnt that he can reply back
and influence their thoughts positively, which has made him feel more
powerful than he has ever felt. Harry denies ever feeling threatened or
anxious when he found out about the conspiracies, although he has not
been able to work because of this outside interference. When asked
further about the challenges of conducting a life under the control of
others, Harry replied: “‘If I went out one day and I realised that
people weren't expecting me to be there, it would be a real shock
again …I would be … I don't know …?! I got so used to people expecting
me to be there and lash out with them …I would feel alone again, which
is what everyone else feels, like alone. So people are like a family for
me, it's like a safety blanket, they make me feel so comfortable now …If
I found out that they are not watching me and reading my mind, I would
feel alone and crazy like everyone else. To feel like I have everyone
following me around, whether it's negative or positive, that alone is a
force of power … knowing that you can influence people's minds in the
right way, I feel like Jesus (of course I'm not) but why not believe?’”

.. _sec2:

Clinical encounter
==================

Harry was referred to Early Intervention in Psychosis services via his
general practitioner, after revealing the unusual situation in which he
found himself. He was prompted to seek help by his family, who were
concerned about his mental health, although he did not believe he needed
help. Rather, he thought that everyone else was deluded for not
realising what was really happening. At the time of the first interview
with the psychiatrist, Harry was described as a very pleasant,
cooperative gentleman, and caring father. Upon examination, his content
of thought was characterised by ever-increasing systems of
conspiratorial views of the world and described as bizarre – including,
for example, the idea that the Queen is a lizard in disguise. This was
associated with a mild degree of formal thought disorder and decline in
social and occupational functioning. There was no evidence of marked
changes in mood, hyperactivity or other signs of elation. Harry
described ‘voices’ talking to him and about him, although when asked the
direct question of whether he was ‘hearing’ voices, he denied this. Risk
to others was considered to be low, whereas a potential vulnerability to
others was highlighted.

Given the presence of clear positive psychotic features and impairment
in functioning, suggesting first-episode psychosis, Harry was informed
about treatment options and antipsychotic medication was prescribed. At
the following appointment, Harry reported non-adherence with his
medication. He said that he had realised there was a microchip inside
him that was being used by others to monitor him and read his mind.
People were making signs at him, following him around, thus he needed to
‘deal with them’. He insisted that he was ‘completely in control’ and
that those who were persecuting him were the ones needing help. While
discussing medication, he became irritable and started accusing staff of
considering him ‘crazy’. He was not amenable to persuasion or reasoning.
To avoid escalation, the clinician had no option but to let him leave
for his home.

Management options were discussed, and clinicians were divided between
those who felt that Harry's symptoms should not be necessarily
considered pathological, and those who felt that his presentation would
fulfil the criteria for compulsory admission to hospital. This latter
understanding was motivated by the clear evidence of mental disorder, a
detected risk of him acting out on his beliefs that others were
persecuting him, potential risk (but no evidence of this) to his
children and failed attempts to treat him in the community. Initial
diagnostic considerations made by the treating clinician were in keeping
with a diagnosis of schizophrenia. However, this diagnosis was
challenged by others, who suggested that his delusions were better
explained by a delusional disorder or, more simply, were in keeping with
the influence of cultural factors and were not pathological at all.
Harry remained convinced throughout that his experiences were real, that
he was the happiest man in the world and that clinicians had no good
reason to ‘label’ him as mentally ill or recommend a compulsory
admission. Unfortunately, the disagreement led to significant subjective
distress reported by Harry, a breakdown in the therapeutic relationship,
disengagement from the team and other adverse social consequences,
including denial of access to his children for a period of time.

.. _sec3:

Questions concerning current conceptions of delusions
=====================================================

This case is illustrative of more general, unresolved issues concerning
current conceptions of delusions, which have a knock-on effect on the
clinical encounter with deluded patients (irrespective of their
diagnosis, but potentially more relevant in the case of schizophrenia).
In particular: What exactly is pathological about delusions? This is
briefly discussed in *Delusional complexities*.Are delusions the source
of the problem or a response to the problem? This is addressed in *The
phenomenological approach to delusion formation*.Can delusions have and
give meaning? An overview of the small body of relevant literature is
offered in the corresponding section. Our inquiry into meaning in this
context takes a subjectivist naturalist perspective on the conception of
‘meaning’. Meaning refers here to the extent to which one's life is
subjectively experienced as making sense, and as being motivated and
directed by valued goals.

We temporarily leave diagnostic challenges aside and explore
possibilities for a cross-disciplinary dialogue between philosophy and
psychiatry concerning the nature and meaning of delusions, with direct
relevance for clinical practice. Implications for the clinical encounter
are discussed in the final section.

.. _sec4:

Ethical considerations
======================

The reported patient agreed to the publication of the case study and
provided written consent. All steps were conducted in accordance with
the regulations of Coventry and Warwickshire Partnership NHS Trust and
the Declaration of Helsinki. Written approval for the publication of the
report was obtained from the Research & Innovation Department, Coventry
and Warwickshire Partnership NHS Trust.

.. _sec5:

Delusional complexities
=======================

Delusions are core psychopathological features of severe mental illness.
They are present in the vast majority of patients at first presentation
to early intervention services across affective and non-affective
diagnoses within the psychosis spectrum.\ :sup:`1` They are often
associated with great distress, depression and harm, representing a
significant therapeutic challenge for clinicians.\ :sup:`2,3` Despite
extensive literature on the potential psychological, neurocognitive and
phenomenological underpinnings of delusion formation,\ :sup:`4–6` there
is no consensus as to what causes delusions or why they are maintained
despite their harmful consequences. Furthermore, cross-disciplinary
attempts to define their puzzling nature remain inconclusive –
perpetuating the philosophical debate between doxasticists (who regard
delusions as beliefs) and non-doxasticists (who regard delusions as
other than beliefs).

In psychiatric practice, given the absence of clear biological markers,
the distinction between delusional and non-delusional ideas is not
straightforward. Although meta-analyses of the available data
corroborate a connection between reasoning biases and the occurrence of
delusional ideas,\ :sup:`7` they do not provide an explanation as to why
delusions have the specific thematic content that they have, nor do they
establish clear evidence for a causal relationship. Given the
difficulties in defining what kind of phenomena delusions are, and in
identifying the aetiological factors involved in their formation and
maintenance, the clinical examination and study of delusions continue to
focus on their (apparently more reliable) doxastic features. Such
features predominantly consist of negative epistemic attributes such as
falsehood/incorrectness, fixity/resistance to counterargument and
counterevidence, and implausibility of content.\ :sup:`8` For example,
the DSM-5 defines delusion as: “‘A false belief based on incorrect
inference about external reality that is firmly held despite what almost
everyone else believes and despite what constitutes incontrovertible and
obvious proof or evidence to the contrary. The belief is not ordinarily
accepted by other members of the person's culture or subculture (i.e. it
is not an article of religious faith). When a false belief involves a
value judgment, it is regarded as a delusion only when the judgment is
so extreme as to defy credibility. Delusional conviction can sometimes
be inferred from an overvalued idea (in which case the individual has an
unreasonable belief or idea but does not hold it as firmly as is the
case with a delusion)’ (p. 819).\ :sup:`9`”

However, as philosophers have already made clear, overreliance on these
criteria is often not a successful strategy when trying to distinguish
pathological beliefs from everyday irrational beliefs.\ :sup:`10` For
instance, prejudiced, superstitious or self-enhancing beliefs are all
often ill-grounded and impervious to counterargument, yet they do not
warrant a psychiatric diagnosis or compulsory treatment. In the case of
Harry, these criteria evidently fell short and clinicians immediately
noticed how similar Harry's belief were to those held by ‘flat earthers’
and other fringe communities with heavy influence across social media.
What then makes such beliefs different from those of patients affected
by schizophrenia? When do beliefs become a symptom of mental disorder?

Focusing on the psychological and sociological features (such as
distress, harm and dysfunction) associated with certain unusual
convictions might be a better way forward for clinicians. However, this
pragmatic approach, relying on criteria of clinical utility, hides other
significant and ethically loaded challenges.\ :sup:`11` For instance,
how do we equitably decide on the threshold of harm or potential harm
that deserves a psychiatric diagnosis and/or warrants treatment against
someone's will? Such a decision will necessarily involve a value
judgement on the part of the clinician not only about what might be
harmful to another person in relation to their behaviour, but also in
relation to their own feelings (e.g. levels of distress), sociocultural
background, previous life circumstances and future goals. Disregarding
the value-laden context that shapes the lived experience of delusional
phenomena might increase patients’ vulnerability to suffering epistemic
injustice.\ :sup:`12` Harry for example, appeared to be adequately
fulfilling his parental role and repeatedly denied feeling distressed,
anxious, worried or depressed. A battery of psychological tests showed
no clinically relevant anxiety or depression; rather, they revealed
surprisingly high levels of meaning in life (see discussion below). On
the other hand, his level of social and occupational functioning is
moderately low. Harry is unable to maintain a stable occupation and what
seems to be giving a special significance to his experience (i.e. the
fact that he has special access to the truth) is effectively making him
an outcast from society.

Clinicians therefore seem to be faced with a case of meaningful
dysfunction. The person's beliefs seem to impose a limitation on their
objective ability to keep consistent employment (social dysfunction).
Concurrently, they also seem to enhance the person's sense of agency and
belonging, and no distress is reported with regards to either the
beliefs or the ensuing impairment. Does such a condition deserve
clinical attention? Does it require pharmacological treatment? Despite
being grounded within a delusional experience, could such feelings play
a protective role against depression and anxiety?

It is clear that, although the concept of delusions as ‘false beliefs’
is commonly taken for granted within mainstream psychiatry, their
complex nature remains difficult to grasp. As a result, the threshold
for pathology or dysfunction continues to be set on pragmatic grounds
relying on criteria of severity and degree of distress/functional
impairment. However, in certain cases, it seems that the clinical
utility of pragmatic criteria is limited by a clash with the framework
of values of the individual patient. This begs the key question of what
constitutes a meaningful or functional life, and leads us further into
the relationship between facts and values in psychiatry.\ :sup:`11`

Although many of these questions remain open and in need of further
philosophical investigation, an important response in the past 20 years
has been the renewed interest in phenomenological approaches to
psychopathology. This has been accompanied by a revival of the legacy of
Karl Jaspers and other classical authors, such as Minkowski, Bleuler,
Conrad, Blankenburg, Mayer-Gross and J.S. Strauss, among
others.\ :sup:`13–17` The phenomenological approach argues that,
particularly in the case of schizophrenia, there is a qualitative
difference between ‘true’ delusions and delusion-like ideas, and that a
more precise and in-depth characterisation of changes in the experience
of self and lived world is needed if we aim to distinguish
non-disordered analogues from clinically relevant forms of
psychopathology.

.. _sec6:

The phenomenological approach to delusion formation
===================================================

Various phenomenologically informed authors have challenged the view
that delusions are beliefs (see `Table 1 <#tab01>`__ for some excerpts
from the contemporary phenomenological literature). In contrast with the
doxastic (i.e. belief-based) position, phenomenologists have understood
delusions to be either something of a completely different nature from
beliefs (this is the ‘non-doxastic’ view), or they have suggested that
this discussion is beside the point as it is failing to engage with what
is most fundamental to delusion.\ :sup:`18` Jaspers himself wrote: ‘To
say simply that a delusion is a mistaken idea which is firmly held by
the patient and which cannot be corrected gives only a superficial and
incorrect answer to the problem. Definition will not dispose of the
matter’ (p. 93).\ :sup:`19` Table 1Conceptions of delusions from a
phenomenological perspective‘For the phenomenologist, delusion is
typically understood not as an individual belief […] but as a mutation
of the ontological framework of experience itself.’ (p.
633)\ :sup:`20`\ ‘It follows that delusions, at least in this scenario,
are not simply anomalous beliefs or perceptions. […] They have a type of
intentionality that differs from mundane experiences of believing,
remembering, imagining or perceiving.’ (p. 153)\ :sup:`21`\ ‘One might
indeed argue that the so-called ‘delusional beliefs’ are not beliefs in
the epistemic sense at all, for they lack the basis of a shared
intentional relation to the world.’ (p. 25)\ :sup:`22`\ ‘Schizophrenic
delusions typically reflect a fundamentally altered
existential-ontological structure of subjectivity.’ (p.
173)\ :sup:`23`\ ‘When a subject enters into a delusional state, he or
she is entering into an alternative reality. [*…*] one can enter into a
delusional reality just as one can enter into a dream reality, or a
fictional reality, or a virtual reality.’ (pp. 255–6)\ :sup:`24`

Following Jaspers, much phenomenological research has drawn attention to
the subtle and all-enveloping changes that are often described by
patients with delusions during the ‘prodromal’ or ‘pre-delusional’
stages. Jaspers refers to this experience as ‘delusional mood’ or
‘delusional atmosphere’, and describes it as follows: “‘Patients feel
uncanny and that there is something suspicious afoot. Everything gets a
new meaning. The environment is somehow different—not to a gross
degree—perception is unaltered in itself but there is some change which
envelops everything with a subtle, pervasive and strangely uncertain
light. A living-room which formerly was felt as neutral or friendly now
becomes dominated by some indefinable atmosphere. Something seems in the
air which the patient cannot account for, a distrustful, uncomfortable,
uncanny tension invades him’ (p. 98).\ :sup:`19`”

In Jasper's view, the subsequent emergence of a specific belief content
can only be understood in the context of a ‘transformation in our total
awareness of reality’.\ :sup:`19` Such fundamental transformation can,
in some cases, give rise to what he calls ‘delusion proper’ or ‘primary
delusions’ to distinguish them from ‘delusion-like ideas’. Although the
latter kind of delusional beliefs can be understood as an excess or lack
of certain known emotional states or responses (such as fear,
melancholy, suspiciousness, anxiety and wonder), the former kind of
delusions remain largely incomprehensible in the face of empathic or
common-sense attempts to grasp their meanings.

Just as Harry mentioned the film ‘The Truman Show’ to aptly communicate
his puzzling experience of infinite space, many patients talk about
living in a ‘real simulation’ or a ‘fake reality’ to convey the sense of
unreality that surrounds them. In these moments, they often describe
changes in their subjective experience of the lived world, including the
dimensions of time, space, objects, atmospheres and other
persons.\ :sup:`25` For example, time or movements might be experienced
as accelerated or slowed down, objects may appear two-dimensional as if
they were artificially projected on the backdrop of a theatrical
scenery, and other people may look like mannikins, puppets or robots
wearing a mask.\ :sup:`26` This is similar to what Renee describes as an
all-embracing atmosphere of unreality in her memoir: “‘Objects are stage
trappings, placed here and there, geometric cubes without meaning.
People turn weirdly about, they make gestures, movements without sense;
[…]. And I - I am lost in it, isolated, cold, stripped purposeless under
the light. A wall of brass separates me from everybody and everything.
In the midst of desolation, in indescribable distress, in absolute
solitude, I am terrifyingly alone; no one comes to help me. This was it;
this was madness […] Madness was finding oneself permanently in an all
embracing Unreality’ (p. 33, abridged).\ :sup:`27`”

Although this can be perceived in some cases as an exciting and
illuminating experience (such as in Harry's case), most often the
delusional atmosphere is fraught with dread, anxiety and a sense of
uncertainty. Patients often describe an increasing tension coupled with
an unbearable sense of impending doom.

In his seminal work, the German psychiatrist Klaus Conrad calls this
initial phase ‘trema’ (stage fright) – emphasising the suspenseful and
expectational character of the experience.\ :sup:`28` Even Harry
reported that it all came as a shock for him, calling into questions
everything he knew about the world since the day he was born. This state
of perplexity seems to trigger an urgent quest for meaning, as
highlighted in many first-person reports and clinical
accounts.\ :sup:`29` The delusion then provides the long-sought meaning
that dissipates anxiety, perplexity and confusion. In this moment, which
Conrad calls the ‘apophany’ or ‘aha experience’, the person promptly
makes sense of what was previously only alluded to. This new
(delusional) meaning alleviates the unbearable sense of dread previously
felt. The soothing effect provided by the experience of finding ‘a fixed
point’ to cling on is described well by Jaspers: “‘This general
delusional atmosphere with its vagueness of content must be unbearable.
Patients obviously suffer terribly under it and to reach some definite
idea at last is like being relieved from some enormous burden […] the
achievement of this brings strength and comfort, and it is brought about
only by forming an idea, as happens with health people in analogous
circumstances’ (p. 98, abridged).\ :sup:`19`”

Framed in this way, the newly developed delusional framework can be
understood as establishing a new ‘order’ within the ‘disorder’, one
which can alleviate negative feelings of anxiety or induce intense
feelings of wonder. This allows the person to re-establish a pragmatic
connection with the world, although this can come at great expense
because of the difficult integration between the shared sociocultural
world and the delusional reality. Rather than being the source of the
problem, the emerging delusional narrative (i.e. what we currently
identify as belief) may be better interpreted as a secondary response to
anomalous experiences which call into question our most fundamental
assumptions about ourselves, the world and the meaning of life.

.. _sec7:

Can delusions have and give meaning?
====================================

After a period of disengagement with services, Harry agreed to continue
working with the team, although he refused to interact with staff
initially involved in his care. Because of the research interests of one
of the clinicians (R.R.), Harry was invited to talk about his
experiences, and he happily completed a small battery of
self-administered psychological tests that measure depression (Calgary
Depression Scale for Schizophrenia),\ :sup:`30` anxiety (Generalized
Anxiety Disorder seven-item scale)\ :sup:`31` and meaning in life (the
Purpose-in-Life Test (PILT), the Life Regard Index (LRI) and the
Multidimensional Existential Meaning Scale).\ :sup:`32–34` These
assessments revealed high scores across three measures of meaning in
life (indicative of a strong sense of coherence (SOC), purpose and
significance), and low scores on the depression and anxiety scales,
suggestive of absent levels of depressive or anxious features (see
`Table 2 <#tab02>`__). Table 2Self-administered measures of depression,
anxiety and meaning in life conducted in the case studyMeasureTotal
scoreDetails of measuresCalgary Depression Scale for Schizophrenia3≥6 is
commonly used to identify clinically significant depressive
symptomsGeneralized Anxiety Disorder seven-item scale0Scores of 5, 10
and 15 are taken as the cut-off points for mild, moderate and severe
anxiety, respectivelyPurpose-in-Life Test96Range 20 (low purpose) to 100
(high purpose)Life Regard Index68Range 14 (low life regard) to 70 (high
life regard)Multidimensional Existential Meaning Scale99Range 15 (low
existential meaning) to 105 (high existential meaning)

There is no doubt that Harry's experiences have brought about a
significant change in the way in which Harry sees himself and the world
around him, albeit one that others cannot recognise. As we can gather
from his account, it all came as a shock, a powerful revelation of what
life is really like. Whether this change is one that can be understood
by others as ‘having meaning’ (i.e. making sense) and ‘giving meaning’
(i.e. contributing to a sense of purpose and significance) is a far more
complex issue, but one worthy of further investigation and one that
carries significant implications for the clinical encounter. From
Harry's perspective, this new order seems to provide a coherent
explanation for his experiences, while also enhancing his sense of
direction in life and enthusiasm regarding the future.\ :sup:`35` There
is, however, a remarkably small amount of empirical research that has
examined such issues, which we briefly review below.

In a study by Roberts,\ :sup:`36` a group of patients with chronic
schizophrenia displaying elaborated delusional systems was administered
the PILT and the LRI. The author compared the scores obtained by
actively delusional patients with chronic schizophrenia with a matched
sample of other chronic patients, who were previously deluded but were
now in remission. Psychiatric rehabilitation nurses and Anglican
ordinands were also included as non-clinical comparison groups. Results
showed that patients with elaborated delusions had a very high level of
perceived purpose and meaning in life (and low level of depression and
suicidal ideation), and PILT/LRI scores were significantly higher than
those found in patients with chronic schizophrenia in remission. The
group in remission felt both more depressed and found their lives less
meaningful than those with active delusions. Scores in the actively
deluded group were also similar to those found in the Anglican ordinands
comparison group and higher than those found in the nursing group.
Another study\ :sup:`37` investigated the relationship between the SOC
and delusional experiences in individuals with schizophrenia, using
self-report scales for delusions, SOC, depression and expressed emotion.
SOC among participants experiencing acute delusion was found to be
similar to the average scores found in the general population, but a
reduction in SOC was found in the remission period, suggesting decreased
well-being among those with reduced delusional intensity. These findings
led Bergstein et al\ :sup:`37` to speculate about the subjective
meaning-enhancing effect of delusional systems, and the potential
negative consequences associated with the undermining of the acquired
(delusional) background of meaning.

More recently, Isham et al\ :sup:`2` conducted a qualitative analysis of
the narratives of 15 patients with past or present experiences of
grandiose delusions. Although suggesting that serious harm (including
social, physical, sexual, emotional and occupational) was occurring to
people as a result of the delusions, the narratives examined contained
first-person descriptions of the grandiose beliefs as highly meaningful:
a meaning-making theme was generated through the analysis, where the
delusion seemed to ‘provide a sense of purpose, belonging, or
self-identity, or to help make sense of unusual or difficult events.’ A
highly prevalent theme was related to social meanings (i.e. being useful
to and a significant part of society), whereby participants felt ‘part
of a team’, respected by others or involved in intimate relationships.
Similarly, in their qualitative in-depth analysis of four cases, Gunn
and Larkin\ :sup:`38` describe the development of delusions as an
‘inevitable consequence of a radical alteration in lived experience’.
Focusing on what was important to the participants and grounding their
interpretation in the data by using interpretative phenomenological
analysis, they highlight how all their participants had experienced some
perceptual, affective and emotional anomalies demanding explanatory and
sense-making attempts. Although these attempts turn out to be
delusional, they nonetheless seem to provide a fitting explanation for
the anomalous experiences, as well as potential psychological benefits
in terms of enhanced self-efficacy and meaningfulness.

.. _sec8:

Implications for the clinical encounter
=======================================

Harry's case highlights the complexities intrinsic to the concept and
nature of delusions, which are commonly taken for granted within
mainstream psychiatry practice. By appealing exclusively to surface
epistemic features, Harry's delusions might appear outwardly almost
indistinguishable from fringe conspiracy beliefs. In both cases, they
are ill-grounded and we have reasonable contradictory evidence regarding
their veracity. Harry (just like many conspiracy theory believers) is
not be amenable to changing his mind about the fact that he is
constantly monitored, that the Queen is a reptile in disguise and that
the Earth is flat, among other more systematised convictions. His
beliefs are certainly fixed and impervious to counterargument. Do these
features make them pathological? By appealing to a pragmatic criterion
of harmful dysfunction, we could agree on the fact that Harry's social
and occupational functioning is impaired and therefore adequate
interventions should be sought – aiming to ameliorate such undesirable
state. However, Harry is telling us that he is the happiest man in the
world. He reports finding a highly significant meaning for leading his
life, something that gives him coherence and purpose. Value judgements
necessarily come into play at this point, raising broader and more
challenging questions about what makes a good life and where the
threshold should be set for something meaningful to become harmful.
Although we may not have a clear answer to these questions, we should at
least attempt to investigate what the world feels like for Harry. Such
phenomenological endeavour might not only open up a space for dialogue,
but can also advance our understanding of the nature and constitution of
delusional phenomena. Just like the three blind men who came to
different conclusions as to the nature of an elephant, looking only at
the ‘belief’ side of delusions might limit our understanding of what
makes the delusional experience possible in the first place. This may
further aid our attempts to define what makes delusions pathological or
when they should be considered part of a disorder.

Taking into account the subjective changes to the sense of self and
world often affecting people with delusions can improve our empathic
understanding of delusional phenomena; that is, as arising in the
context of a more global transformation of the sense of reality and
familiarity. Within the clinical encounter, delusions can be at the same
time harmful (e.g. causing a dysfunction of some kind) and meaningful.
They can have meaning (i.e. make sense) in relation to uncanny changes
in the lived world, and they can give meaning (i.e.
purpose/significance) in the context of the person's unique life story
and framework of values. When a clash of realities creates an impasse
within the clinical encounter, clinicians should investigate the
presence of anomalous and potentially distressing changes in the
subjective experience of the lived world. Clinicians should also
acknowledge the relentless sense of perplexity often arising from these
experiences, which might trigger a search for explanations and a quest
into the meaning of existence. Although empirical research into these
issues is at its infancy, the potential role of feelings of
meaningfulness in the maintenance of delusions (and their potential
subsiding after remission) should be considered throughout the
engagement and recovery processes. Further interdisciplinary research is
needed to address the question of what constitutes meaningfulness and to
explore its relationship with mental illness.

We would like to thank Harry for his participation and contribution to
this report. We are also grateful to Lisa Bortolotti for providing
helpful comments on an earlier draft of the article.

**Rosa Ritunnano**, MD, is a consultant psychiatrist with the Early
Intervention in Psychosis Service at Coventry and Warwickshire NHS
Partnership Trust, UK, and a PhD candidate at the Institute for Mental
Health, University of Birmingham, UK. **Clara Humpston**, PhD, is a
research fellow in youth mental health methodology at the Institute for
Mental Health, University of Birmingham, UK. **Matthew R. Broome**, PhD,
FRCPsych, is Director of the Institute for Mental Health, University of
Birmingham, UK, and an honorary consultant psychiatrist with the Early
Intervention in Psychosis Service at Birmingham Women's and Children's
NHS Foundation Trust, UK.

R.R. designed the structure and drafted the first version of the
manuscript. C.H. and M.R.B. contributed to all versions of the
manuscript and approved the final version.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors. R.R. is part-funded by a Priestley
PhD scholarship. The views expressed are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the Department of Health and Social Care.

.. _nts4:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.
