==============================
Gwen Douglas, MB ChB, FRCPsych
==============================

Peter Shoenberg
:Date: 2022-04


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
Formerly Consultant Child Psychiatrist at Sutton Child Guidance Clinic
and Clinical Assistant in Psychiatry in the Departments of Obstetrics
and Psychotherapy at University College Hospital, London, UK

Gwenth (Gwen) Jean Elizabeth Douglas, child psychiatrist and
psychoanalyst, who died aged 100 on 22 June 2021, was a pioneer in the
treatment of puerperal psychosis. Tom Main, with whom Gwen trained at
the Cassel Hospital in London, had previously shown that it was possible
to admit seriously ill non-psychotic mothers with their babies to an
in-patient unit. Gwen, however, was the first to describe such an
approach with psychotic women who, after childbirth, were suffering from
schizophrenia or affective disorders. In 1956, having qualified as a
psychoanalyst, she published a short but highly influential paper in
*The Lancet* on giving psychotherapy to six mothers with puerperal
psychosis who had been admitted with their babies to the Neurosis Unit
at the West Middlesex Hospital. She concluded that such mothers could be
safely looked after with their babies and successfully treated with
psychotherapy either alone, or combined with or following physical
interventions.\ :sup:`(n.d.a)` She was supported by Main, who wrote of
‘the twin dangers of separating mother and child, first and more
obvious, to the child and second and as fateful to the mother's
confidence in her future capacity as a mother.’\ :sup:`(n.d.b)` Over
subsequent years, treatment on a mother and baby unit gradually came to
be accepted as the most effective way to manage post-natal psychotic
disorders.

Gwen was born on 4 October 1920 in Papatoetoe (Papatoitoi) on the North
Island of New Zealand, the daughter of William (Bill), later Sir
William, Jordan, a senior Labour politician and later New Zealand High
Commissioner to the UK, and Winifred (née Bycroft). She came with her
family to England at 15 and did her medical training at St Andrews
University, qualifying in 1944. After qualification she served with the
Medical Branch of the Royal New Zealand Air Force. Following the war she
married Bill Douglas, a meteorologist, and they moved to Malta,
returning to England in 1949 when Gwen trained in psychiatry. She and
Bill had a son, Martin.

In 1963 Gwen was appointed to a consultant child psychiatrist post at
Sutton Child Guidance Clinic, where she remained till 1986. She later
worked as a psychiatrist (together with Betty Tylden and Egle Laufer) in
the Obstetric Department of University College Hospital with Professors
Nixon and Brandt, investigating the causes of emotional disorders of the
puerperium and patients with psychosomatic disorders.

Before retiring as a child psychiatrist, she joined the University
College Hospital Psychotherapy Department, and supervised medical
students on the student psychotherapy scheme as well as trainee
psychiatrists. She retired from the National Health Service in 1991 and
continued to practise privately as a psychoanalyst until the age of 86.
She was much loved by colleagues, students and patients, who appreciated
her warm, undogmatic and imaginative approach to psychoanalysis, which
was influenced by her teachers Charles Rycroft and Donald Winnicott. She
spoke with a gentle and confident voice without any trace of her New
Zealand origins.

In retirement Gwen was a keen flower painter and gardener, who enjoyed
receiving friends in her beautiful garden in Banstead. She was an avid
reader and loved going to all the latest art exhibitions in London.
After 2007 she spent her final years comfortably and happily at the Mary
Feilding Guild in Highgate and more recently at Henford House in
Warminster. She was predeceased by her husband, who died in 1987, and
her son.

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.a.

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref2

      n.d.b.
