=======================================================================================
Training Non-Medical Staff for SARS-CoV-2 Swab Collection on a Psychiatric Old Age Ward
=======================================================================================



Joanna Legg
Sophie Ouabbou
Susan Hay*Presenting author.
:Date: 2022-06

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims
      :name: sec_a1

   In the second half of 2020 patients admitted to Highgate Mental
   Health Centre had to isolate in their rooms until a negative
   SARS-CoV-2 test result was obtained. This was stressful for both
   patients, who were unwell in their mental state, and staff. Swabs for
   PCR testing were only being collected by junior doctors which meant
   that out of hours, this responsibility would fall exclusively upon
   the duty doctor. There were often significant delays to obtain a
   sample. We decided to train non-medical staff on an old age ward so
   that the responsibility of collecting samples could be shared with
   nurses and healthcare assistants.

   .. rubric:: Methods
      :name: sec_a2

   In November 2020 we held one training session with several members of
   staff from our ward. In the following days we did one to one training
   sessions with the members of staff who, due to their shifts, were not
   available for the original training session. We excluded admissions
   that happened prior to SARS-CoV-2 being mandatory, those where the
   patient refused to be swabbed, and those patients who were
   transferred from another institution already with a pre-admission
   swab.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a3

   There were 37 admissions, of which we included 30 based on the
   exclusion criteria. 17 admissions occurred prior to training and 13
   after the training sessions. Prior to training, it took 1.059 days to
   obtain a sample and it took 0.846 days after the training sessions.

   .. rubric:: Conclusion
      :name: sec_a4

   Providing a training session to enable nurses and healthcare
   assistants to take samples for SARS-CoV-2 testing reduced the amount
   of time between admission and obtaining a swab sample. We therefore
   shortened the first step of the process that leads to obtaining a
   negative result and enable a patient to come out of isolation.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
