========================
Extracurricular pursuits
========================

:Author: Jonathan WilliamsCorrespondence to Jonathan Williams
         (johwilliams@gmail.com) [1]_
:Date: 2022-06
:Abstract:
   Dr Dignan’s poetry, her care, and her enthusiasm should be lauded.
   There are also many other non-medical pursuits that may make us
   better doctors. But it is difficult to know which of these are
   effective or practicable.


pmc
In medical school we used to debate whether we would prefer to be a kind
doctor or a clever one. Of course, most of us wanted to be both. But
when we were ill ourselves, if we had to choose we were sure we would
want a clever doctor to deal with serious conditions and a kind one for
the minor things.

There is a related rift in mental health services between psychodynamic
work and evidence-based medicine. Certainly, most patients are given one
or the other. Corinne Dignan in her article\ :sup:`1` focuses on
something more on the psychodynamic side, that we are in danger of
forgetting: the feelings and the shared experiences that she neatly
calls the person behind the diagnostic labels. In this commentary I
focus on this specific suggestion, rather than the general topic of
medical humanities.

To clarify, she is not pushing us to become psychotherapists. She sees a
beauty in each person, the special moments in each life and the
treasured memories that gradually disappear in dementia. She experiences
shared memories as special objects that will die unless a person keeps
them alive. Indeed, as long as one person keeps them alive, part of the
departed person still exists. In some senses they do; the memories
exist, and we may sometimes feel that the person does too. This is a
point that I've not seen so well treated elsewhere. Each experience, or
at least an echo of it, continues to exist for as long as someone thinks
about it (akin to the tree in the quad\ :sup:`2`). Dignan's article
serves to warn us not to forget John Eccles's World 2 (subjective
knowledge) as opposed to Worlds 1 and 3 that doctors usually focus on
(physical objects and objective knowledge).\ :sup:`3`

I'm pleased that Dr Dignan is not pushing us all to be poets (I might
rebel). Instead, starting from a traditional learning hierarchy of
medicine–psychiatry–subspecialty–specific job,\ :sup:`4` she adds
another layer. She proposes that the medical humanities – a vast
conglomeration of fields – is a rich hunting ground for broadening
experiences. Not only rich, but necessary: I am going slightly beyond
her words here, but she seems to believe that exploring the humanities
makes us better people, more complete and more able to relate to others.

Dignan's aims are commendable and her poem is gorgeous. By publishing
it, some of the memories she shared with her grandmother will endure for
as long as this journal, perhaps in a cloud on a distant planet. Her
point deserves to be applauded, explored and amplified.

This commentary started with the question of which kind of doctor serves
patients best. We serve patients directly, but also indirectly by
serving the systems around them. In the UK, the General Medical Council
(GMC) says that a good doctor will ‘make the care of your patient your
first concern.’\ :sup:`5` But not your only concern. ‘Good medical
practice’ also includes duties to our own knowledge and skills; to other
patients; colleagues; our personal health; the medical profession; and
the public. I will comment on a few of these that relate to Dignan's
article.

.. _sec1:

What's best for our skills?
===========================

I'm convinced that everyone becomes usefully dubious of their own
intuitions if they regularly spend time with *Thinking, Fast and
Slow*.\ :sup:`6` Kahneman, and many others, have demonstrated that one
of the most pervasive of all thinking defects is narrow framing, in
other words failing to think broadly enough about a problem.

So for what it's worth, here are some of my favourite thought-broadening
activities for psychiatrists, admittedly evidence-light. (a) We could
learn from psychologists, many of whom are explicitly trained to become
‘scientist practitioners’. It's a lifelong challenge.\ :sup:`7,8` (b)
Some of my best colleagues love long-distance holidays. Who knows which
came first? They may have been broad-minded even before the first
long-haul trip. (c) In my job, watching two siblings bicker and play can
produce a delightful impression of them as parts of the stream of social
humanity. It also produces useful objective observations. But are these
valuable enough to justify the second child missing school to attend?
For the impression, no. But for the observations: perhaps for one
session and not subsequently. (d) As Francis Bacon noted in 1597,
‘Reading maketh a full man, conference a ready man, and writing an exact
man’. Of course, all three parts are relevant to a modern psychiatrist.
Reading autobiographies and complex fiction can extend the range of
people we empathise with.\ :sup:`9` And, no doubt, by ‘conference’ he
was referring to respectful participation in a multidisciplinary team.

.. _sec2:

What's best for us emotionally?
===============================

Many doctors need a protective carapace, so they don't become too
dispirited by demanding patients. Others need to suppress their
enthusiasm for over-engaging with patients. Other doctors (one thinks
particularly of researchers) need to give full flow to their meticulous
tendencies. Overall, we should try to find a happy, productive, middle
course that works for us personally.\ :sup:`10` Part of this might
include keeping a personal diary – for ourselves and those who come
after us.

Dignan's aspiration is that we should all follow her example, and become
more empathic. I hope some of us do. But I'm not optimistic. The classic
example is the people travelling to give a lecture on good Samaritans,
who step over a sick person, especially if they feel rushed.\ :sup:`11`
Allow me to give a personal anecdote of my own failure to transfer
attitudes between relationships. During my time as a junior psychiatrist
I felt sympathy towards a man whose Huntington's disease destroyed the
relationships in his family: but I didn't notice the same process
happening in my own family at the same time (due to my father's multiple
sclerosis).

.. _sec3:

What's best for healthcare funders?
===================================

Dignan advocates that we should spend more time with patients. In my
experience, most doctors wish this. But how much time is justified? In
many units, a ward assistant will be given the role of making patients
feel comfortable and listened to; some of them have a delightful,
naturally reassuring manner that hardly relies on personal knowledge.
Usually, the history taking is delegated to junior doctors. That system
creates good histories, good relationships and good training.

But the more senior doctors need to be quick, more distanced, less
emotionally involved. It sounds like a shortcoming, but it isn't: their
distance makes a necessary contribution to the thinking of a diverse
team. The older psychiatrists typically have a wider social circle and
have known vastly more patients: they have all exceeded the Dunbar
number of 150 people that we can personally relate to.\ :sup:`12` Even
more distance is needed by doctors in poor countries: if they have only
5 or 10 minutes per patient, constant personal involvement will
overwhelm them.

.. _sec4:

What's best for the future of healthcare?
=========================================

As a field, we need different things: practitioners exploring literally
everywhere for insights, with the more distant explorers widely spread
out, not following others, to cover the vast, less promising terrain.
Even after our explorers have found a promising activity, as Dignan has
done, it's fiendishly difficult to prove that it's
worthwhile.\ :sup:`13`

We discussed these issues in our continuing professional development
(CPD) group recently. One consultant said it was only her impending
retirement that made her feel safe enough to say that getting to know
the patients was highly undervalued, and actually disapproved of by
managers. Another felt it had to be conducted as a ‘guerilla activity’
because managers saw it as detracting from the necessary work. The group
found art and writing activities useful for patients, but there were no
takers for creating any form of art themselves.

**Jonathan Williams** is a Consultant Child and Adolescent Psychiatrist
with NHS North Central London, UK.

.. _sec-das1:

Data availability
=================

Data availability is not applicable to this article as no new data were
created or analysed in this study.

This work received no specific grant from any funding agency, commercial
or not-for-profit sectors.

.. _nts4:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. [1]
   Commentary on… Evensong. See this issue.
