===================================================================================================================================
Risk, demand, capacity and outcomes in adult specialist eating disorder services in South-East of England before and since COVID-19
===================================================================================================================================

:Author: Agnes Ayton
:Author: David Viljoen
:Author: Sharon Ryan
:Author: Ali Ibrahim
:Author: Duncan FordCorrespondence to Agnes Ayton (suchagnes@gmail.com)
:Date: 2022-04
:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims and method
      :name: sec_a1

   This is a longitudinal cohort study describing the demand, capacity
   and outcomes of adult specialist eating disorder in-patient services
   covering a population of 3.5 million in a South-East England provider
   collaborative before and since the COVID-19 pandemic, between July
   2018 and March 2021.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a2

   There were 351 referrals for admission; 97% were female, 95% had a
   diagnosis of anorexia nervosa and 19% had a body mass index (BMI)
   <13. Referrals have increased by 21% since the start of pandemic,
   coinciding with reduced capacity. Waiting times have increased from
   33 to 46 days. There were significant differences in outcomes between
   providers. A novel, integrated enhanced cognitive behaviour theapy
   treatment model showed a 25% reduction in length of stay and improved
   BMI on discharge (50% *v.* 16% BMI >19), compared with traditional
   eclectic in-patient treatment.

   .. rubric:: Clinical implications
      :name: sec_a3

   Integrated enhanced cognitive behaviour theapy reduced length of stay
   and improved outcomes, and can offer more effective use of healthcare
   resources.


pmc
.. _sec1-1:

National background
===================

In the 2019 Health Survey for England, 16% of adults aged ≥16 years (19%
of women and 13% of men) screened positive for a possible eating
disorder. This included 4% (5% of women and 3% of men) who reported that
their feelings about food had interfered with their ability to work,
meet personal responsibilities or enjoy a social life.\ :sup:`1` This is
almost a threefold increase since 2007.\ :sup:`2` These findings may be
surprising, but are consistent with international epidemiological
data.\ :sup:`3`

In parallel, hospital admissions in England of people with eating
disorders have increased from 4849 in 2007–2008 to 19 116 in
2018–2019.\ :sup:`4` This shows an almost fourfold increase in demand,
and there has been no investment in specialist eating disorder
in-patient services during this time. Approximately 70% of people
needing hospital admission are adults with anorexia nervosa.

On 6 November 2020, after the inquest into five avoidable deaths, the
coroner for Cambridgeshire and Peterborough, concluded that National
Health Service (NHS) treatment for patients with anorexia nervosa is
‘not a safe system’ and risks ‘future deaths’.\ :sup:`5` These
statements mirror the 2017 Parliamentary Health Service Ombudsman (PHSO)
report.\ :sup:`6` Three years ago, the PHSO made several helpful
recommendations, including reviewing medical education, improving the
workforce, ensuring the parity of funding of services across the age
range and strengthening coordination of care. There has been limited
progress since.\ :sup:`7`

Child and adolescent eating disorder services have received substantial
investment since 2015,\ :sup:`7` and progress toward meeting the
referral to treatment waiting time standard has been monitored
(https://www.england.nhs.uk/statistics/statistical-work-areas/cyped-waiting-times/).
These standards require child and adolescent eating disorder services to
begin out-patient treatment within 1 week for urgent cases and 4 weeks
for non-urgent cases. However, neither the standards nor monitoring are
in place for adults, and the much-awaited funding into community eating
disorder services has not yet reached the front line. Adult in-patient
eating disorder services are part of specialist services and have been
commissioned by NHS England. Over the past few years, NHS England has
initiated a shift of commissioning to regional NHS collaborations, with
the intention of transformation of care pathways focusing on the health
of local populations, with the aim of improving outcomes and
cost-savings.

.. _sec1-2:

Aims and objectives
===================

In this paper, we describe demand and capacity for hospital treatment of
patients with severe eating disorders in the Healthy Outcomes for People
with Eating Disorders (HOPE) provider collaborative in South-East
England since July 2018, and examine the effects of the COVID-19
pandemic. In addition, we compare the outcomes between different
in-patient services, using the traditional eclectic treatment model with
a new integrated enhanced cognitive behaviour therapy (I-CBT-E)
treatment across the care pathway.

.. _sec2:

Method
======

This is a longitudinal cohort study, involving all patients with eating
disorders referred for admission from a total population of 3.5 million
in South-East England. The study has been approved by the Oxford Health
NHS Foundation Trust Audit Department. Patient consent was not needed
for the study.

.. _sec2-1:

The HOPE provider collaborative
-------------------------------

The HOPE network was one of the first pilot sites of adult eating
disorders selected by NHS England. It was established in shadow
commissioning form in July 2018. The main goal of the network was to
bring together in-patient and community services from several
organisations providing in-patient and out-patient services for adults
with eating disorders. Initially, the network included a total
population of 5.2 million.

The footprint was reduced in September 2019, and the following partners
have remained in the provider collaborative: Oxford Health NHS
Foundation Trust (Oxfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Swindon, Wiltshire),
Berkshire Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust, Gloucestershire Health and
Care NHS Foundation Trust and the Priory Group (in-patient provision in
Bristol).

The total population of the geographical footprint is 3.5 million.
Oxford Health NHS Foundation Trust provides 14 beds in Oxford, and 6
beds in Marlborough. In addition, Oxford has six day patients and
Marlborough has four. Berkshire and Gloucestershire have day services
for 8 and 12 patients, respectively. The Bristol Priory is an
independent partner in the provider collaborative providing specialist
eating disorder beds; however, as it has a national contract with NHS
England, their beds are not aligned with the HOPE provider
collaborative.

This provider collaborative has developed a more collaborative and
joined-up approach to admissions and discharge planning, with the aim of
improving access closer to home and joint working between in-patient and
out-patient teams. A weekly joint clinical activity panel consisting of
senior clinicians from each organisation and a single point of access
for all referrals has been established, to ensure that decisions about
admissions are made by highly experienced clinicians. Referrals and
outcomes have been systematically monitored since July 2018, for the
whole geographical area.

There was also an agreement to monitor outcomes, and compare the NHS
England standard eclectic model of care\ :sup:`8` with a new, integrated
stepped-care model using I-CBT-E in Oxford, building on the pioneering
work of Dalle Grave et al.\ :sup:`9` I-CBT-E offers a single
evidence-based psychological model delivered by a multidisciplinary
team, starting before admission and continuing across the treatment
pathway (40 sessions in total). A detailed I-CBT-E formulation ensures
continuity, consistency and a personalised treatment plan.

The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly affected capacity as a result of
infection control measures across the care pathway. In-patient and
out-patient services needed to reduce the number of people in poorly
ventilated and crowded buildings. Day services had to be closed because
of environmental and staffing challenges. Furthermore, remote working
may have caused delays in recognition of deterioration of
non-cooperating patients (both in primary and secondary care).

.. _sec2-2:

Demographic and clinical data
-----------------------------

This paper analyses data from the partners who have been part of the
provider collaborative since the beginning (Oxfordshire,
Buckinghamshire, Wiltshire, Gloucestershire and Berkshire) for the
period from July 2018 to 1 April 2021. The data collected concerns
referrals, including demographic and clinical information, such as
diagnoses and severity of physical risk related to malnutrition, and
outcome of referrals, including length of admission and travelling
distance. Body mass index (BMI) was recorded on referral, admission and
discharge for those admitted. No additional outcome data was recorded
for patients not admitted.

.. _sec2-3:

Statistical analysis
--------------------

Descriptive statistics were conducted to describe the demographic and
clinical characteristics of the referred patients. Categorial variables
were compared by *χ*\ :sup:`2`-test, and continuous variables by
independent *t*-test and ANOVA, using SPSS for Windows version 22.

.. _sec3:

Results
=======

Between July 2018 and 1 April 2021 there were 351 referrals for
admission; 97% were female and mean age was 29.6 ± 11 years. According
to DSM-5 severity ratings, 56.3% had extreme anorexia nervosa, 20.8% had
severe anorexia nervosa, 17.9% had mild-to moderate anorexia nervosa,
1.8% had severe or extreme bulimia nervosa and 3.2% had other specified
feeding or eating disorder. Approximately 65% of referrals were urgent
or emergencies since the establishment of the provider collaborative.
Urgency of referral was determined by the risk to the patient's health
and safety, including level of malnutrition and risk to self; 19% of
referrals had a BMI <13, which is an indicator of potentially
life-threatening malnutrition, and a further 37% had extreme
malnutrition. This pattern of referrals remained unchanged after the
COVID-19 pandemic, but the absolute numbers increased by 21%.

There were no significant differences in mean age (29.20 ± 10.5 years
*v.* 30.1 ± 11.9 years), gender (97% *v.* 99% female), diagnosis (95%
*v.* 96% anorexia nervosa) or need for compulsory admissions (84.6% *v.*
83.4% informal), before or since the COVID-19 pandemic.

.. _sec3-1:

The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the outcome of referrals
---------------------------------------------------------------

Before the COVID-19 pandemic, 63.6% of patients were admitted, which has
increased to 65% since the COVID-19 pandemic (`Table 1 <#tab01>`__). The
number of patients waiting has increased by 20%. However, this is likely
to increase further with time, as the in-patient capacity for admission
is insufficient, not just within the footprint, but also nationally. The
reason for no admission was usually because of the patient refusal
and/or ongoing out-patient treatment. Approximately half of these
patients were admitted following a second referral. Table 1Outcome of
referrals before and since COVID-19 (number of patients and
percentages)Before COVID-19Since COVID-19TotalNot admittedNot admitted65
(38%)55 (35%)120 (36%)In-patient unit in the HOPE provider collaborative
areaCotswold House Oxford50 (29%)50 (32%)100 (30%)Cotswold House
Marlborough15 (9%)22 (14%)37 (11%)Bristol Priory9 (5%)12 (8%)21 (6%)Out
of areaPriory OOA15 (9%)14 (9%)29 (9%)NHS OOA14 (8%)3 (2%)17 (5%)Cygnet4
(2%)2 (1%)6 (2%) [1]_

Before the COVID-19 pandemic, 43% of referrals could be admitted within
the network, which has increased to 54% since the COVID-19 pandemic. The
Priory Group provided 5% of admissions within the geographical area and
a further 9% out of area.

.. _sec3-2:

Waiting times and travelling distance
-------------------------------------

The distance from home to hospital increased during the COVID-19
pandemic (from 41.4 ± 60 miles to 56 ± 78 miles). Eight patients were
admitted to Priory Glasgow because of a lack of bed availability in
England. Waiting times increased from 33 ± 44 days to 46 ± 43days
(*t*-test = 0.03)

Even pre-COVID-19, the HOPE network already had a large demand/supply
mismatch, with insufficient specialist beds within the network and
lengthy waiting times even for patients with extreme or life-threatening
malnutrition. This causes a vicious cycle of delayed and high-risk
referrals requiring urgent admissions. `Figure 1 <#fig01>`__
demonstrates the variation in waiting times before and since the
COVID-19 pandemic. It shows huge variations, even for the most high-risk
patients, reflecting the reduced capacity in the system. One of the
additional challenges is the lack of striated beds, which makes it
difficult to meet the needs of patients who present with a high level of
behavioural disturbance resulting from comorbidities such as autism
spectrum disorders or personality disorders. Fig. 1Waiting times for
admission depending on severity of malnutrition.

The reduced specialist in-patient and day treatment capacity has had a
significant impact on community teams in the footprint. Because of the
lack of prompt access to specialist eating disorder units, approximately
19% of patients have required acute admission to general hospitals for
emergency medical treatment. This represents a 20% increase during the
COVID-19 pandemic, when acute hospital capacity is also reduced.

.. _sec3-3:

Differences between in-patient providers
----------------------------------------

Before the COVID-19 pandemic, there were significant differences between
individual in-patient services in terms of length of stay (Supplementary
Table 1 available at https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2021.73).

As part of the establishment of the provider collaborative, Cotswold
House Oxford has been pioneering the implementation of an integrated
stepped-care treatment, based on an intensive CBT-E model developed
between Professor Fairburn in Oxford and Dr Dalle Grave in
Italy.\ :sup:`10` The model advocates integration of NICE-approved
psychological treatment across the care pathway, with clear
goal-oriented, time-limited admissions, followed by day and out-patient
treatment. Given the differences between the Italian healthcare system
and the NHS, we adapted the model by including a crisis admission
pathway for those patients who refused full weight restoration but
agreed to informal treatment. The details of the treatment will be
discussed in a separate paper.

Here, we summarise the comparison between the outcomes of patients who
were admitted to the Oxford unit and other specialist units that use the
current standard eclectic treatment approach promoted by NHS England.
Previous internal service evaluation of the Oxford pilot programme
before the COVID-19 pandemic showed improved outcomes, reduction of
restrictive practices (such as needing to use nasogastric feeding under
restraints), improved patient outcomes and reduced length of stay.
Despite the challenges, this has been maintained through the COVID-19
pandemic (`Table 2 <#tab02>`__): 50.5% patients reached a BMI >19
compared with 16% in all other providers (*χ*\ :sup:`2` = 0.000). Table
2Comparison of the traditional eclectic in-patient treatment with the
Oxford pilot programme (integrated CBT-E)In-patient treatment
model\ *n*\ Means.d.Significance (two-tailed)Referral BMIIntegrated
CBT-E9014.72.050.377Eclectic model9214.51.96Discharge BMIIntegrated
CBT-E8818.22.270.0001Eclectic model8417.01.89Length of admission
(days)Integrated CBT-E8885.154.10.01Eclectic model92107.268.8Home
mileage to in-patient unitIntegrated CBT-E7620.6216.50.000Eclectic
model7967.180.5Age (years)Integrated CBT-E9032.213.20.005Eclectic
model9427.558.80Waiting time for admission (days)Integrated
CBT-E8933.4839.70.95Eclectic model9233.142.3 [2]_

.. _sec4:

Discussion
==========

To our knowledge, this is the first paper providing a systematic
analysis of referral patterns, access, waiting times and outcomes for
adults with eating disorders requiring specialist in-patient treatment
in England. The main strength of the study is the systematic data
collection for 2.5 years, across a large geographical area with a
population of 3.5 million. As the joint data collection had been
established in July 2018, we have also been able to analyse the impact
of the COVID-19 pandemic on this patient population and corresponding
services. Although regional, our data derive from a large geographical
area, representing 6% of the population of England, so we believe that
our findings are representative of most adult eating disorder services
elsewhere in the country.

Referrals have increased by 20% since the COVID-19 pandemic, and this
has resulted in increasing number of patients needing admission to acute
hospitals and further away from home. Waiting times for admission were
long even before the COVID-19 pandemic, and <50% of patients could be
admitted close to home. Of those admitted, approximately a third were
placed out of area. Out-of-area placements are well-known to cause
distress to patients and families, and have been shown to have longer
length of stay and poorer outcomes.\ :sup:`11` Most worryingly, even
before the COVID-19 pandemic, patients with life-threatening
malnutrition had to wait several weeks for admission, and this timescale
has increased further since the pandemic, placing patients, staff and
provider organisations at risk.

Although current national-level data by NHS Benchmarking on bed
occupancy in hospitals suggest that demand is not dangerously high, this
is not an appropriate indicator of how pressured specialist eating
disorder services are across the care pathway. Infection control
requirements and workforce impact of COVID-19 mean that the majority of
NHS services are running at reduced capacity. Many services are
struggling with reduced staffing levels resulting from the COVID-19
pandemic. Furthermore, in specialist eating disorder services,
monitoring risks and ensuring patient flow between in-patient, day and
out-patient services has become much more challenging in an already
pressurised system.

The physical environment is important to ensure patient and staff
safety. The Royal College of Psychiatrists has been campaigning for
improving mental health estates and facilities.\ :sup:`12` This has
become even more pressing since the COVID-19 pandemic: improving
services to meet increasing demand requires capital investment into NHS
mental health services

Following the high-profile reports into avoidable deaths, there has been
an acknowledgement that adult community eating disorder services need to
be funded to reach parity across the age range,\ :sup:`6,13` and this is
reflected in the new NHS England commissioning guidance for adult eating
disorder services. However, this is still aspirational, and many adult
patients struggle to access care or face long waiting times. This may
explain the high number of patients in our network referred to hospital
with a BMI of <13, in a life-threatening emergency, which has increased
by 20% during the COVID-19 pandemic. This is a concern, as although the
Royal College of Psychiatrists published the ‘Management of Really Sick
Patients with Anorexia Nervosa’ (MARSIPAN) guidelines to improve patient
safety in emergencies,\ :sup:`14,15` their implementation has been
inconsistent in acute hospitals, as shown by the recently reported
tragedies. This is partly because of the limited training of eating
disorders for doctors and allied health professionals, an area of
concern that was identified by the PHSO.\ :sup:`16`

Although it is possible that the much needed investment into adult
community eating disorder services in the next few years will reduce the
need for in-patient treatment in the future, this is going to take
several years. In-patient provision needs to be increased to meet
current demand, which has quadrupled since 2007–2008 in
England.\ :sup:`4` Furthermore, recent national epidemiological
data\ :sup:`1` indicate increasing prevalence across the lifespan, and
this is consistent with increasing referrals to the community teams and
the increasing rates of hospital admissions. NHS-led provider
collaboratives will only succeed if funding meets the need in the
population served.

However, it is important to consider the significant variations in
length of stay and short-term outcomes between providers. Our findings
are consistent with previous research. In 2013, a UK-wide cohort study
of adult specialist eating disorder units reported an average length of
stay of 182 days and an average discharge BMI of 17.3,\ :sup:`17` with
only 22% reaching a BMI of 19 by discharge. In our study, only 16% of
patients admitted to a unit offering standard eclectic treatment reached
a discharge BMI >19, as opposed to 50% in the I-CBT-E pilot programme
(within a 25% shorter length of stay), Discharge BMI is an important
predictor of medium- and long-term outcomes.\ :sup:`18,19` Although this
was not a randomised controlled trial, the treatment model is based on a
previous randomised controlled trial, and published
manuals.\ :sup:`9,10,20,21`

The findings of the Oxford pilot programme (I-CBT-E) utilising an
evidence-based and integrated stepped-care approach suggests that, with
service transformation, reduced length of stay, improved patient
outcomes and reduced restrictive practices are achievable. This can
ensure use of existing limited in-patient capacity more effectively, and
suggests a significant opportunity for cost-savings. This is
particularly important, as a large proportion of patients in the cohort
had an illness duration of >10 years. Our findings replicate previous
studies from Italy,\ :sup:`22,23` and suggest that the model is
generalisable to the NHS. However, adaptation would require the
redesigning of care pathways, staffing levels and skill mix. CBT-E
training is freely available online
(https://www.cbte.co/for-professionals/training-in-cbt-e/) and has been
tested in previous research.\ :sup:`24`

The main limitations of our study are that we only had BMI as a
consistent indicator of outcome at discharge, and that the comparison
between in-patient providers was not based on randomisation. However,
randomisation would not have been practically possible, given the
limited capacity and the dispersal of beds in a wide geographical area
in England and Scotland. Further work with our partners will explore
more details of the longer-term psychosocial and health economic
outcomes.

A multicentre, randomised controlled trial would be desirable, but it is
important to note that the current NHS England standard contract is
based on expert opinion rather than trial evidence, or robust outcome
monitoring.

.. _sec4-1:

Clinical implications
---------------------

It has been frequently stated that anorexia nervosa has the highest
mortality of any mental disorder affecting young people and
adults.\ :sup:`25,26` We should not accept this: people should not die
of anorexia nervosa or any eating disorder, as they are treatable mental
disorders.\ :sup:`27` Severe complications, such as malnutrition, are
safely reversible, even in the most extreme cases.

The I-CBT-E model is based on a cohesive, integrated stepped-care
approach for people with severe eating disorders, and wider
implementation in the NHS has the potential to both improve short-term
and long-term outcomes, with the added benefit of cost-savings. A
national audit of demand, capacity and treatment outcomes would help to
establish the need for specialist eating disorder beds, as well as
explore the differences between various treatment models. There is an
urgent need for capital investment into NHS mental health facilities to
ensure a safe environment for patients and staff in the light of the
COVID-19 pandemic.

We are very grateful to all of our partners for submitting the data,
Beris Cummings and Este Botha for data collection and Dr Andrew Ayton
for proofreading.

**Agnes Ayton** is a Consultant Psychiatrist with Cotswold House,
Oxford, Oxford Health NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **David Viljoen** is a
Consultant Clinical Psychologist with Cotswold House Oxford, Oxford
Health NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Sharon Ryan** is a Quality
Improvement Lead with HOPE and CAMHS PC, Oxford Health NHS Foundation
Trust, UK. **Ali Ibrahim** is a Consultant Psychiatrist with the
Berkshire Eating Disorder Service, Berkshire NHS Foundation Trust, UK.
**Duncan Ford** is a Provider Collaboratives Lead with Thames Valley
Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services, Oxford Health NHS
Foundation Trust, UK; and Provider Collaboratives Lead at the HOPE Adult
Eating Disorder Provider Collaborative, Oxford Health NHS Foundation
Trust, UK.

.. _sec5:

Supplementary material
======================

For supplementary material accompanying this paper visit
http://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2021.73.

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   click here to view supplementary material

.. _sec-das1:

Data availability
=================

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding author, A.A., upon reasonable request.

A.A. and A.I. developed the initial idea. D.V., S.R. and D.F. helped
with the design and data collection. A.A. wrote the first draft and all
authors contributed to the final draft and the revised version.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

.. _nts6:

Declaration of interest
=======================

None.

.. [1]
   HOPE: Healthy Outcomes for People with Eating Disorders; OOA: Out of
   area placement; NHS, National Health Service Providers.

.. [2]
   CBT-E, enhanced cognitive behaviour theapy; BMI, body mass index.
