.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
*Nice White Parents* is a podcast series about an ordinary middle school
in New York.\ :sup:`(n.d.)` It charts how, over the school's 50-year
history, White parents have consistently, and almost always unwittingly,
exercised their enormous unsaid power in the public education system to
directly and indirectly hamper the school's mission of providing a
progressive and integrated education to children of all racial and
socioeconomic backgrounds.

One of the most striking messages from the series is how White parents
have been able to game all aspects of the education system and hoard
resources for their own children. The White parents covered in the
series had more time, influence and resources, and were therefore much
better equipped to navigate the system and advocate for their children
than Black and minority ethnic parents in the same city. Although the
White parents were making seemingly justifiable and rational decisions,
the collective impact of their decisions has been to perpetuate
long-standing racial inequalities that go back several decades.

Listening to this podcast series, it was hard not to draw parallels with
what I see as a clinician in the UK's National Health Service (NHS).
Some scenarios that I encounter regularly bear an uncanny resemblance to
it, such as parents ferociously seeking referrals to multiple agencies
and specialists to get diagnoses for their children by lobbying multiple
doctors and seeking second opinions. Other scenarios are less directly
analogous, but nonetheless relate to power dynamics and individuals’
ability to navigate a complex system – wealthy professionals seeking NHS
referrals on the basis of private medical reports, and individuals
demanding specific investigations or treatments on the basis of informal
conversations with medical family members or friends.

The nature of a publicly funded system, whether it is health or
education or any other sector, is that every decision needs to be seen
through two lenses – at the individual and the population levels. The
traditional medical paradigm, and more specifically recent movements
such as patient-centred care, encourage us to favour the individual
lens. The danger of this, as we are seeing very powerfully in 2021 with
the COVID-19 pandemic, is that it ignores the vulnerable, the less
powerful and the voices that cannot shout as loud. Resources are
inevitably finite and so each decision we take about one individual or
one family can have very real and profound repercussions for many
others.

Of course, not all White patients are manipulative, and not all
manipulation is by White patients. But as the podcast series points out,
nobody talks about White parents, and likewise in medicine, we rarely
talk about White patients. Just like the ‘nice White parents’ in New
York, my White patients are not acting maliciously and they are not
fundamentally against the NHS values of compassion and equality. The
problem is rather that they are rarely cognisant of their power and,
more importantly, the system simply works better for those who can game
it.

As we seek to achieve greater equity in healthcare, is it time we talked
more about White patients?

.. container:: references csl-bib-body hanging-indent
   :name: refs

   .. container:: csl-entry
      :name: ref-ref1

      n.d.
