============================================================================================================================================================================================================================================
A Quality Improvement Project (QI) on Screening for Rapid Eye Movement Sleep Behaviour Disorder (RBD) in Patients Referred to Trafford Memory Assessment and Treatment Service (MATS), Part of Greater Manchester Mental Health Trust (GMMH)
============================================================================================================================================================================================================================================

Rachel Moir
Ruth Pye-Jones
Amit Sindhi
Boben Benjamin*Presenting author.
:Date: 2022-06

:Abstract:
   .. rubric:: Aims
      :name: sec_a1

   Lewy Body Dementia (LBD) is predicted to be under-diagnosed in the
   general population. RBD is one of the four core clinical criteria for
   the diagnosis of LBD. Longitudinal studies of RBD show strong
   association with LBD, so there is potential for early identification
   of LBD and subsequent management. We aimed to screen 100% of patients
   referred to Trafford MATS for RBD.

   .. rubric:: Methods
      :name: sec_a2

   We performed three Plan-Do-Study-Act (PDSA) cycles; in the first
   cycle we introduced a validated RBD screening question, from the
   DIAMOND-Lewy study, to the initial memory assessment proforma. This
   asked ‘Have you ever been told that you “act out your dreams” while
   sleeping (punched or flailed arms in the air, shouted or screamed)?’

   In the second PDSA cycle, we delivered a RBD and LBD educational
   package to the specialist memory nurses who undertake the initial
   assessments. In the third PDSA cycle reminders were sent to the team
   to use the new assessment proforma.

   We collated data from patients who had undergone an initial memory
   assessment between 06/04/21- 22/06/21 from the trusts electronic
   database.

   .. rubric:: Results
      :name: sec_a3

   Initial baseline data showed that 0% of initial assessments screened
   for RBD; at the end of PDSA one this was 100% and 75% at the end of
   PDSA two. This increased to 100% at the end of the last PDSA cycle.
   The main reason for non-completion of the screening question was use
   of the old proforma.

   4/152 patients screened positive; patients were diagnosed with
   Alzheimer's disease, delirium, vascular dementia and mixed
   Alzheimer‘s disease and vascular dementia, respectively.

   .. rubric:: Conclusion
      :name: sec_a4

   The introduction of a RBD screening question into the MATS initial
   assessment proforma improved screening for RBD. We think the
   variation in screening compliance rates was likely due to
   practitioners using old assessment proformas, hence sending reminders
   of the new proforma.

   A limitation of the project was that some patients did not have a bed
   partner, which makes identification of the disorder more difficult.

   Since the completion of the project, we have circulated a news
   bulletin through the Dementia United charity to raise awareness of
   our QI project nationally and also discussed the project with the
   Lewy Body society. Whilst our project has not yet identified a
   patient with LBD, we feel that introducing this screening question is
   a very easy and reproducible change to implement and RBD should be
   screened for in all memory patients.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
