===========================================================================
The Royal College of Psychiatrists’ Leadership and Management Fellow Scheme
===========================================================================



Alex Till
Deepa Bagepalli Krishnan
Russell Gibson
Michael Hobkirk
David Somerfield
Helen Crimlisk

:Correspondence: Dr Alex Till (alextill54@gmail.com)

:date: 2022-06

:Abstract:
   The Royal College of Psychiatrists’ Leadership and Management Fellow
   Scheme aims to develop and support a new cohort of leaders within
   psychiatry. This article provides an introduction to the scheme,
   which is accessible to all higher trainees with the support of their
   host organisation. We explore its development, structure and how it
   is evolving to provide a strong platform for achieving the College's
   ambition to benefit patient care by embedding a culture of medical
   leadership within mental health services.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
The Royal College of Psychiatrists’ (RCPsych) Leadership and Management
Fellow Scheme has been developed by the College's Psychiatric Trainees’
Committee (PTC), the Leadership and Management Committee (LMC) and the
Centre for Advanced Learning and Conferences (CALC).

It is designed to support the formation of a national network of
emerging medical leaders within psychiatry. It builds on the General
Medical Council's Generic Professional Capabilities framework\ :sup:`1`
and, in accordance with the Faculty of Medical Leadership and
Management's leadership and management standards for medical
professionals,\ :sup:`2` it provides an enhanced understanding of
medical leadership at an individual, team, organisational and systemic
level.

The College has committed to ‘provide high quality face-to-face training
in leadership and management’ that specifically meets the needs of
‘psychiatrists making the transition to consultant grade’.\ :sup:`3`
This scheme, despite the necessity to adapt to an alternative delivery
model as a result of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, fulfils that commitment.
It realises the vision of both the LMC, ‘to develop and support
psychiatrists as leaders and managers’,\ :sup:`4` and of the PTC, to
support trainees in having ‘greater autonomy over their careers through
in-programme developmental opportunities’.\ :sup:`5`

It is critical that future doctors develop leadership values and
behaviours as core attributes, and learn about leadership, followership
and team working.\ :sup:`6` For this to be successful, however, and for
psychiatrists at every level to assume leadership responsibility,
trainers and training organisations must ensure that leadership
development is given parity with achieving clinical and academic
competencies. It is only through this mechanism that we will truly
achieve the notion of ‘expert leadership’\ :sup:`7` within psychiatry.

This paper supplements Till *et al*\ :sup:`8` which explores the
importance of leadership, leadership development theory and
opportunities available for psychiatric leadership
development.\ :sup:`8` We focus specifically on the development and
structure of the RCPsych Leadership and Management Fellow Scheme as a
mechanism to develop emerging medical leaders within psychiatry.

.. _sec1:

Evidence in practice
====================

The evidence for leadership and leadership development in healthcare is
clear.\ :sup:`9` An engaged medical workforce with capable, high-quality
leaders has consistently been demonstrated to be integral to driving
improvements and supporting high-quality care.\ :sup:`10,11`

Complementary to this, there is a growing call at a national level for
services funded by the National Health Service (NHS) to strengthen their
approach to leadership development and talent management,\ :sup:`12`
with future doctors ‘developing an appreciation of leadership at an
early stage’.\ :sup:`6`

Leadership development, however, does not suit a ‘one size fits all’
approach. There is little robust evidence for the effectiveness of
specific leadership development schemes and difficulty in evaluating
their effectiveness.\ :sup:`9` As a result, multiple leadership
development programmes have emerged at a national, regional and local
level, with various approaches undertaken to meet the diverse needs of
doctors, depending on their stage of training, specialty and
location.\ :sup:`8`

Traditionally, leadership development programmes have focused on
so-called ‘horizontal’ leadership development, where individuals attend
courses run by external providers which focus at an individual level on
‘what leaders need to know’: developing their knowledge, skills and
competencies.\ :sup:`13`

Individual interventions alone, however, are insufficient.\ :sup:`14`
Developing leadership crucially depends on context, and leadership
development must take place in the context in which an individual works.
Within healthcare, this should develop organisational allegiance and
engagement in the quality and safety agenda of organisations, maintain a
systems focus to meet the challenges of increasingly integrated health
and social care services, and develop a strong network between
tomorrow's leaders.\ :sup:`15` Furthermore, supported by a recent
systemic review,\ :sup:`16` mixed external and internal faculty is
crucial, with project work and mentoring increasing the likelihood of
good organisational outcomes.

The RCPsych Leadership and Management Fellow Scheme draws lessons from
this knowledge, other schemes, and the latest educational leadership
theory, to combine a national training programme with a local
apprenticeship model, so that fellows not only experience ‘horizontal’
leadership development but are also exposed to ‘vertical’ leadership
development.\ :sup:`13`

‘Vertical’ leadership development focuses on ‘how leaders think’,
advancing interdependent styles of more complex, systemic and strategic
thought.\ :sup:`13` It relies on three primary conditions: ‘heat
experiences’, ‘colliding perspectives’ and ‘elevated
sense-making’.\ :sup:`17` These are described further below, with
illustrative quotations reflecting how fellows experienced these ways
some of the scheme's fellows have experienced these are reflected in
their illustrative quotations below. Fellows consented to anonymised
quotes from evaluation data being included in publications.

Heat experiences place fellows in challenging situations where there is
a degree of risk. Fellows experience this both in the classroom and
through the leadership projects undertaken in their place of work. This
is the ‘what’ that disrupts and disorients their traditional thinking to
discover new and better ways to make sense of the challenges they face
as they assume increasing leadership responsibility: “‘The service
development project consolidated our more abstract learning. It helped
me get first-hand experience of the challenges faced being a leader, how
I might need to develop and adapt my leadership style in different
situations, and to become more self-aware and collaborative in my
approach to leadership’.”

Colliding perspectives, on the other hand, are the ‘who’. Fellows are
exposed to leaders both across the system and within their local
organisations, including patient and carer leaders. When combined with
the community of learning that they establish with their peers from
around the country, fellows are enabled to gather different views and
opinions, challenge their existing mental models\ :sup:`18` and see the
world through diverse new perspectives: “‘I valued the opportunity to
work with different trainees across the country, hear from eminent
leaders about their leadership journeys, and meet individuals within the
management hierarchy of the organisation. It allowed us to share
experiences and learn from each other, to de-mystify senior leadership
roles, and to connect and gain better understanding of those in
managerial roles’.”

Elevated sense-making is the final piece, the ‘how’. In combination with
their ‘consulting pairs’, where fellows are partnered to coach each
other through the scheme, and senior mentoring locally, fellows are
afforded the space to reflect and begin integrating their experiences
and new perspectives, to advance their action logics\ :sup:`19` and
leadership effectiveness: “‘The opportunity to reflect and role-play was
very useful and very powerful. It enabled me to see the consequences of
my behaviour and how it might affect others. My experience of working
with my organisation mentor was also very positive, she really helped me
work though fervent leadership dilemmas’.”

.. _sec2:

Development
===========

The RCPsych Leadership and Management Fellow Scheme was founded through
a joint venture between the College's Psychiatric Trainees Committee,
the Leadership and Management Committee and the Specialist Advisor for
Workforce. It was first proposed to the Education and Training Committee
in February 2017, and although originally modelled on the Royal College
of Physicians’ (London) Chief Registrar Scheme, it adopted an
alternative model and evolved to embrace a more inclusive approach.

To achieve this, the scheme was modified to be potentially accessible to
all higher trainees in psychiatry, including those in less than full
time (LTFT) training, without any extension to the duration of their
training. It occurred ‘in-programme’, across a 12-month period,
averaging 1 day per week, utilising trainees’ protected special interest
time. This minimised provider costs, with no requisite for funding
fellows' salaries or clinical backfill.

Medical directors from mental health providers across the UK were highly
supportive of the scheme, and in the absence of central funding, were
prepared to make a financial investment of £2000 per trainee, with full
or partial self-funding (including via the trainee's study budget)
excluded to maximise equity of access and ensure organisational
commitment.

With this early adoption, a competitive tendering process was pursued,
with the RCPsych Centre for Advanced Learning and Conferences (CALC)
being selected above highly competitive offers from multiple business
schools and the Faculty of Medical Leadership and Management (FMLM) to
deliver the national leadership development training programme.

Recruitment was delegated to host organisations and supported by
training-programme directors, with statements required that fellows had
been identified and nominated through an open and competitive process,
as determined locally.

We welcomed the first cohort of RCPsych Leadership and Management
Fellows in September 2019, with an initial intake of 30 fellows from 19
different service providers; over half were female (57%) and from Black
and minority ethnic communities (63%).

.. _sec3:

Structure
=========

The RCPsych Leadership and Management Fellow Scheme is designed to
support the formation of a national network of emerging medical leaders
within psychiatry and develop their confidence and ability to operate
within and lead across a range of mental health organisations and
systems to improve patient care.

It combines a bespoke, high-impact leadership development training
programme with a local apprenticeship model, where fellows are mentored
by senior medical leaders within their organisations and proactively
engage in a variety of leadership projects.

.. _sec3-1:

National training programme
---------------------------

Building on the College's extensive experience in providing highly
regarded leadership and management training, the evidence-based bespoke
leadership development training programme is facilitated by the
programme faculty, in conjunction with outside expertise where relevant.
It is designed to enhance a range of practical knowledge and skills that
consider leadership from the perspective of four behavioural domains
relating to self, team, organisation and system, as outlined by the
FMLM's Leadership and Management Standards for Medical
Professionals.\ :sup:`2` A detailed up-to-date programme is available
from the College on request.

Although originally designed for face-to-face learning, the implications
of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic were felt with our first cohort, and we took
this as an opportunity to adopt an exciting new digitally focused
approach, with the same content delivered virtually.

A central focus of the programme is to develop an underpinning community
of learning, as fellows are afforded the space to reflect on their own
leadership style, and conditions are established in which collaborative
relationships can be optimised as they network with peers, share their
experiences and learn collaboratively from best practice across the
multiple organisations they represent.

Fellows are additionally uniquely exposed to inspirational national
leaders from across the system, with guest speakers, including a number
of prominent psychiatric leaders with national roles both within and
outside the College, integrated throughout the programme.

.. _sec3-2:

Local mentoring and support
---------------------------

Fellows are supported and mentored throughout the scheme by a senior
medical leader within their organisation, who commits to a minimum of
six mentoring sessions throughout the 12-month duration of the scheme
when nominating a fellow. This is a key aspect of the scheme and is
essential to the success of the fellow's role.

The expectation is for the mentoring role to be held by the medical
director or a nominated deputy of sufficient seniority and, where
appropriate, individual project supervision may be delegated to a
clinical director.

In conjunction with this, fellows should also have opportunities to
shadow at an executive level and with key external health and local
authority partners. This aims to generate a deeper understanding of
healthcare leadership and management within the wider social, political
and economic context.

.. _sec3-3:

Leadership projects
-------------------

A fundamental component of the scheme is the development of fellows as
apprentice leaders through their engagement in a variety of leadership
projects within their local organisations.

The exact nature of leadership projects is negotiated and managed
locally between the fellow and their mentor. Fellows can join existing
larger projects or develop their own smaller projects, although it is
stipulated that they should be guided to ensure that all projects are of
strategic or operational significance to the organisation, ensuring that
fellows make a meaningful contribution and organisations gain a return
on their investment. Some examples of leadership projects are given in
`Box 1 <#box1>`__. Box 1Examples of leadership projects undertaken by
RCPsych Leadership and Management Fellows 2019–2020 Trust-wide
leadership and training in quality improvementQuality improvement
projects related to high-dose antipsychotic prescribing, reducing
restrictive practices under the Mental Health Act, and the co-production
of service developments to amplify the patient voice and improve patient
experienceTrust-wide policy developments related to the management of
dual diagnosis, COVID-19, video consultations, physical health
management and electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoringPathway developments
related to naloxone prescribing in general hospitals, management of
medically unexplained symptoms, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD) in child and adolescent mental health services, and clinical
decision units within forensic services

Recognising that projects can evolve, emerge and falter for various
reasons, not least a worldwide pandemic, successful completion of the
RCPsych Leadership and Management Fellow Scheme is not conditional on
the ‘success’ of a fellow's project. There is an explicit recognition
that learning can occur irrespective of this, and that a fellow's
success is rather more meaningfully determined by their engagement with
the programme, their reflective practice and their mentor's feedback,
with their learning, growth and leadership development assessed
throughout the scheme.

.. _sec4:

Benefits
========

`Boxes 2 <#box2>`__ and `3 <#box3>`__ summarise two fellows' experiences
of participating in the scheme, with `Box 4 <#box4>`__ outlining the
intended benefits of the RCPsych Leadership and Management Fellow Scheme
for individual fellows, the organisations in which they work, and for
patient care. Box 2Vignette 1: a fellow's experience of the RCPsych
Leadership and Management Fellow Scheme‘I feel this fellowship has
provided me with the foundations to further acquire the knowledge and
skills that are relevant in the context of leading a complex healthcare
system. The opportunity to lead a trust-wide project with the support of
my mentor allowed me to work collaboratively with multidisciplinary
professionals across organisations and think about change management and
sustainability in a very different way. Combined with the deeper insight
into leadership theories I gained through the national training
programme, and the reflective nature of the sessions, which I
particularly enjoyed, I now feel more confident in leading service
improvement projects and in engaging with diverse stakeholder groups.
Furthermore, I found that being part of a national scheme, whilst being
supported locally by a senior mentor, helped me build links and network
with peers and senior leaders both locally and nationally. This was a
unique feature of the scheme and I have no doubt it will help me in my
future role as a consultant in the organisation.’ Box 3Vignette 2: a
fellow's experience of the RCPsych Leadership and Management Fellow
Scheme‘One of the great advantages of the scheme was the direct support
from a senior mentor to get “hands on” in a significant trust-wide
project. Like many other trainees, I had previously been involved in
small-scale projects, but had never been given responsibility for
developing such a complex intervention across multiple community teams.
Whilst simultaneously daunting and exciting, I found the direct support
of my mentor invaluable in negotiating the complexity of the trust
systems, while working collaboratively with a number of colleagues from
different backgrounds, including project management, IT and senior
managers, in addition to key clinical staff who would be delivering the
intervention. Throughout the scheme my mentor was able to help me keep
on track with the project and helped me to identify and keep in mind the
vision of we wanted to achieve. I now feel much more able to lead
change, effectively advocate for improved patient care, and am better
prepared for the challenges of starting as a consultant.’ Box 4Intended
benefits of the RCPsych Leadership and Management Fellow
Scheme\ **Benefits for patients and the organisation** High-quality
care: increase the number of highly skilled medical leaders able to
develop and foster collaborative practice and high-quality careImproved
services: bring an enthusiastic and fresh perspective with committed
time to help improve the safety and quality of your services and help
create a culture of continuous improvementEnhanced medical engagement:
fellows hold mutually enhancing conversations with trainees, senior
leaders and management to boost the performance of the
organisationEmerging medical leaders: invest in your local talent and
nurture the next cohort of medical leaders within your
organisation\ **Benefits for the individual** Heightened self-awareness:
gain a deeper understanding of which aspects of yourself enable or
constrain your leadershipDiscover your inner leader: begin or continue
the process of discovering and releasing your leadership
potentialMentoring, networking and support: learn from senior medical
leaders and develop an inspiring network of like-minded peers, including
from within the RCPsych Leadership and Management Fellow Scheme Alumni
Network, which fellows will be invited to join on completion of the
schemeLeadership and management skills: develop your understanding and a
widening repertoire of leadership competencies and skills that will help
you be a better medical leader and apply for associate fellowship of the
Faculty of Medical Leadership and ManagementFollowership skills: gain a
greater understanding of the role that followers play in the
co-construction of leadership identitiesCareer autonomy: take control of
your career and increase your confidence in extending your portfolio and
building a local and national profile

.. _sec5:

Evolution
=========

The RCPsych Leadership and Management Fellow Scheme is an evolutionary
process and key to its future development will be feedback from both
fellows and mentors, the needs of our healthcare system and the
sociocultural needs of the wider society we lead within.

Although the College has a well-established reputation for delivering
leadership and management training, this is the first developmental
scheme for trainees. It emerged organically, being co-produced by those
for whom it was intended. The scheme will continue to be developed on
this basis in order to further adapt and respond to the specific needs
of higher trainees in psychiatry, provide value to the sponsoring
organisations and achieve FMLM accreditation.

We are proud of our first cohort in 2019–2020, who despite the
SARS-CoV-2 pandemic all successfully completed the scheme. We are also
pleased to have been able to adapt to an exciting new digitally focused
approach for 2020–2021, allowing for more regular contact that will be
supported by a new online platform to promote networking, shared
learning and reflection.

We acknowledge the challenges that the loss of face-to-face learning
involves, particularly regarding the development of close and trusting
relationships, but believe that a digital approach will be critical for
the future. It not only ensures that mental health services are capable
of weathering the current storm, but also that leadership capabilities
within the psychiatric workforce are still developed and able to rise to
future challenges as we deal with the mental health implications of the
SARS-CoV-2 pandemic alongside the implementation of the NHS Long Term
Plan.\ :sup:`20`

Reassuringly, however, although we and many others look forward to the
return of face-to-face learning, research from the Centre for Creative
Leadership\ :sup:`21` has highlighted similar levels of results for
online leadership training, while providing the additional benefits of
increased convenience and accessibility.

Combined with increasing confidence and familiarity with digital
engagement, we will therefore integrate these opportunities as
face-to-face learning returns and embrace a more blended approach. We
hope that this increased flexibility will widen access to the scheme for
Category 1 less than full time (LTFT) trainees (i.e. those with health
reasons or caring responsibilities) and for those living at a greater
geographical distance from the College, by reducing face-to-face
learning.

Providing additional value, current alumni have been invited to
facilitate action learning sets, and to join the programme faculty for
future cohorts. They have also established an RCPsych Leadership and
Management Fellow Scheme Alumni Network. This will be integrated with
the RCPsych Leadership and Management Committee and future cohorts of
the RCPsych Leadership and Management Fellow Scheme. It aims to maintain
links between fellows as they become future leaders within mental
healthcare across the UK, nurture the next generation through near-peer
mentoring, promote collaboration across the system, develop shared
learning and good practice, and strengthen the connection between mental
health services and the College.

The success of this scheme highlights the appetite for strong medical
leadership among progressive healthcare organisations throughout the UK,
who recognise the importance of advanced leadership development schemes
for aspiring organisational and system leaders.

The scheme has also unearthed a wider unmet need for leadership
development among specialty doctors, new consultants and other groups;
they of course have their own unique challenges that deserve appropriate
recognition. Appreciating this, the scheme is diversifying and
strengthening its leadership faculty in order to improve its offer,
strengthen its resilience and develop greater resources from which to
further develop the leadership and management skills of the wider
membership.

.. _sec6:

Conclusions
===========

Leadership and management is for all doctors, for all psychiatrists at
every level. It is not just for those with formal roles within
organisational hierarchies who hold designated leadership positions. Nor
is it about stand-alone heroic individuals: it collectively lives among
us as a professional body and we must learn to nurture, support and
value one another.

The RCPsych Leadership and Management Fellow Scheme is just one step
towards developing leaders in psychiatry. Through the combination of a
national training programme with a local apprenticeship model, both
formal and informal leadership development is provided, where emerging
leaders have a safe space to take risks, experiment and develop ‘on the
job’.

It is important to recognise, however, that leadership development does
not suit a ‘one size fits all’ approach. Whether through this scheme or
another, we each have a responsibility to collectively develop and
establish a culture that nurtures leadership talent and ultimately
improves the lives of people with mental illness.

We thank Dr Aideen O'Halloran for her initial support of the scheme,
alongside Dr Kate Lovett, Dr Ian Hall, Dr Wendy Burn, Ms Karla Pryce and
Ms Michelle Braithwaite for helping us reach where we are today. We also
thank our inaugural cohort of fellows and mentors for taking a risk and
supporting our initial pilot, along with our guest speakers, who have
offered their valuable time to nurture the next generation of
psychiatric leaders.

**Alex Till**, MBChB, MRCPsych, MSc, MBA, is a specialty registrar in
forensic psychiatry with Health Education England (North West), UK, and
was Chair of the Royal College of Psychiatrists’ Psychiatric Trainees
Committee in 2018–2019. **Deepa Bagepalli Krishnan**, MBBS, MRCPsych,
PGDip, Dip IBLM/BSLM, is a Clinical Assistant Professor in the Faculty
of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Nottingham, UK, and a
speciality registrar in general adult psychiatry with Health Education
England (East Midlands); she was an RCPsych Leadership and Management
Fellow in 2019–2020. **Russell Gibson**, BSc(Hons), MBBCh, MRCPsych,
MSc, is a specialty registrar in general adult and old age psychiatry
with Health Education England (Peninsula), UK, and was an RCPsych
Leadership and Management Fellow in 2019–2020. **Michael Hobkirk**,
FRCPsych, MSc, MMedEd, FHEA, is a consultant child psychiatrist and
Director of Medical Education with Sussex Partnership NHS Foundation
Trust, and former College Lead for Training, Royal College of
Psychiatrists, UK. **David Somerfield**, FRCPsych, is Medical Director
and a consultant psychiatrist with Devon Partnership NHS Trust, UK.
**Helen Crimlisk**, FRCPsych, MSc (Ashridge), FAcadMEd, is Deputy
Medical Director of Sheffield Health and Social Care NHS Foundation
Trust and an Associate Registrar for Leadership and Management, Royal
College of Psychiatrists, UK.

.. _sec-das1:

Data availability
=================

The data that support the findings of this study are availablefrom the
corresponding author, A.T., upon reasonable request.

All authors met the four ICMJE criteria for authorship, being equally
involved in the design, drafting and revision of the article.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

.. _nts5:

Declaration of interest
=======================

A.T. founded the RCPsych Leadership and Management Fellow Scheme in
collaboration with M.H. and D.S., with H.C. assuming oversight following
her appointment as Associate Registrar for Leadership and Management.
D.B.K. and R.G. were inaugural RCPsych Leadership and Management Fellows
in 2019–2020.
