.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
*Nutt Uncut* is a profile of psychopharmacology and healthcare policy
development as much as an autobiography of Professor David Nutt.
Regarding his desire to inform the public about the risks of
psychoactive substances (legal and illegal), he has had the courage of
his convictions to persevere with work in the field and to provide
answers founded on research evidence.

Early in Nutt's career, anti-vivisection activists bombed his workplace
and he was ‘put under the protection of the anti-terrorism police’. In
2009, he was sacked as chair of the UK's Advisory Council on the Misuse
of Drugs, a statutory public body. The affair attracted widespread media
attention. Nutt also described how the Cabinet Office deleted a chapter
on the harm caused by alcohol from an independent report that it had
commissioned and to which he had contributed. The Cabinet Office had
taken advice from the drinks industry, a striking conflict of interest.
Political, economic and vote-driven prejudices could supplant the best
scientific evidence in policy-making. Nutt has encountered many other
hurdles in his work. When planning to investigate the therapeutic
effects of magic mushrooms (psilocybin) on depression, challenges
included gaining research ethics committee approval, then obtaining the
illegal drugs legally.

Politicians’ substance misuse mantra seems to be ‘once illegal, always
illegal’. No drug has been removed from those listed as controlled
substances in the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971, despite more recent research
on relative harms. The Psychoactive Substances Act 2016, which Nutt
designated ‘the most repressive piece of legislation in the UK for 400
years’, likewise marginalised risks. Misinformed international drug
policy can also have untoward consequences: when the United Nations
allowed police forces to seize the precursor of ecstasy, it resulted in
black market trading of more hazardous alternatives.

Nutt's book achieves his goals, to ‘put into the public domain, in
non-specialist terms, the truth about psychiatric disorders and their
treatments’ and to counter ‘extreme and unfounded claims’ about drugs.
It is also an absorbing read for clinicians who want to brush up on
their psychopharmacology and to appreciate better the convoluted paths
of government health policy decision-making.
