======================================================================================
Local Health Systems Resilience in Managing the COVID-19 Pandemic: Lessons from Mexico
======================================================================================

:Author: Clara Juárez-Ramírez
:Author: Hortensia Reyes-Morales
:Author: Gaudencio Gutiérrez-Alba
:Author: Diana L Reartes-Peñafiel
:Author: Sergio Flores-Hernández
:Author: José Alberto Muños-Hernández
:Author: André Escalante-Castañón
:Author: Miguel MaloCorresponding author: Hortensia Reyes-Morales,
         e-mail: hortensia.reyes@insp.mx
:Date: 2022-07-07
:Abstract:
   The concept of *resilience* was applied to the public health field to
   investigate the way health systems are impacted by health crises,
   what conditions allow them to mitigate the blow, and how they
   reorganize once the crisis is over. In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic
   caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus represented a global challenge
   demanding immediate response to an unprecedented health crisis.
   Various voices drew attention to the intensity of the crisis in
   countries with greater inequalities, where the pandemic converged
   with other social emergencies. We documented the experiences of
   health personnel who faced the pandemic at the primary care level
   while simultaneously maintaining the functioning of other areas of
   medical care. Our results derived from a qualitative study comprising
   103 participants from five states of Mexico. We aimed to show through
   inferential analysis their perspective on what we call “the
   resilience of local health systems.” We observed three stages of
   experience during the crisis: (a) Preparation (official guidelines
   received to organize care, training, and planning of epidemiological
   surveillance); (b) Adaptation (performance of community-based
   prevention activities, infrastructure modifications, telehealth); (c)
   Learning (participatory governance with city councils, business
   sector, and organized population). The study suggests that the local
   health systems analyzed benefited from the initiatives of health
   personnel that in some cases positively exceeded their duties. In
   terms of the resilience analysis, they were able to handle the impact
   of the crisis and cope with it. Their transformative capacity came
   from the strategies implemented to adapt health services by managing
   institutional resources. Their experience represents a lesson on the
   strengthening of the essential functions of health systems and shows
   a way to address successfully the increasingly complex health
   challenges of the present and future times.


pmc
Supplementary Material
======================

.. container:: caption

   .. rubric:: 

   Click here for additional data file.
