=================================================================================================
Specialist teams as constituted are unsatisfactory for treating people with personality disorders
=================================================================================================



Conor Duggan
Peter Tyrer
:Correspondence: Peter Tyrer (p.tyrer@imperial.ac.uk)

:date: 2022-04

:Abstract:
   It is now becoming standard practice in most advanced economies to
   provide specialist services for those with personality disorder. Such
   services, almost exclusively, provide complex well-structured
   psychological interventions lasting many months for a small number of
   those with borderline personality disorder pathology. The evidence
   suggests that these treatments are effective but they can only be
   provided for a small number of people. However, in every area the
   numbers of patients with significant personality disorder far exceeds
   those that are treated, and most of these have other personality
   disorders. It is argued that the current service system is not
   working efficiently and should be replaced by one that provides
   resources and expertise within community teams with some external
   advice from specialists but no transfer of responsibility to a
   designated team.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
In 2003 the now well-referenced and praised Department of Health booklet
*Personality Disorder: No Longer a Diagnosis of Exclusion* made a number
of statements about the development of new services that were being set
up across the country at that time. This included: “‘Good practice
indicates that service provision for personality disorder can most
appropriately be provided by means of: the development of a specialist
multidisciplinary personality disorder team to target those with
significant distress or difficulty who present with complex problemsthe
development of specialist day services in areas with high concentrations
of morbidity.’\ :sup:`1`”

This advice has been followed for the subsequent 18 years and reinforced
by National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines
in 2009.\ :sup:`2` We believe it to be false, despite it being made in
good faith, and a re-evaluation is needed.

.. _sec1:

Problems with current practice
==============================

Most parts of England now have a service devoted, if not dedicated, to
the care of people with personality disorders.\ :sup:`3` Although this
is probably unique in providing the only national service for
personality disorders in the world, it is not working too well. The
notion behind these specialist services seems logical. Community mental
health teams (CMHTs), at least initially, provide care for the main
service-seeking group, those with emotionally unstable personality
disorder (EUPD). But they are neither sufficiently skilled nor properly
resourced for this task, so the obvious response is to refer them on to
a specialist service. Unfortunately, this referral is not always
successful, either because the appropriate specialist service is not
available (very few offer comprehensive treatments) or it is judged that
patients lack the psychological maturity to benefit from such an
intervention. Rejections are frequent and this undermines the notion of
‘no longer a diagnosis of exclusion’. There can also be long delays and
many bureaucratic hurdles to overcome before patients start treatment
even if they are deemed suitable for one of the specialist treatments,
mainly mentalisation-based treatment, dialectical behaviour therapy
(DBT) or cognitive approaches. The experiences of patients in trying to
access these services has promoted anger and also stigma, as many who
feel rejected by these services for any reason blame the label of
personality disorder and its incompetent adherents for their lack of
care.\ :sup:`4`

.. _sec1-1:

Readiness for referral
----------------------

An intervention to anticipate the delay has been suggested in this
journal based on a transtheoretical model of change so as to ‘guide how
to increase readiness for referral and when to refer’.\ :sup:`5` This is
complicated, including psycho-education about EUPD, personal
formulation, crisis planning, motivational interviewing and several
other things. But many will fail to negotiate this particular
steeplechase of fences. At that point it is frankly ridiculous to expect
the CHMT to provide further informed care. This inevitably leads to
disenchantment on both sides; patients feel dissatisfied and are
increasingly looking for interventions outside the standard systems to
satisfy their needs\ :sup:`4` and CMHTs feel disempowered while at the
same time being ‘stuck’ with patients who are reluctant to engage.

.. _sec1-2:

The alternative view
--------------------

A good service for those with personality disorder should be able to
provide continuity of care and be able to engage with all those who have
personality disorder. Currently, mental health professionals have a
fixation with emotionally unstable personality disorder (EUPD) or its
DSM equivalent, borderline personality disorder (BPD). This is
understandable; it accounts for virtually all published
guidelines\ :sup:`6` and completely neglects the 84% of people with
other personality disorders identified in national studies.\ :sup:`7`
There is another reason for paying more attention to the other
personality disorders: their long-term outcome is currently less good
than that for borderline personality disorder.\ :sup:`8,9`

.. _sec2:

Specialist services for EUPD
============================

So why does EUPD get all the attention? It is because it is the
quintessential ‘treatment-seeking’ personality disorder (i.e. a type S
personality disorder), in contrast to the majority of type R personality
disorders, which are treatment rejecting.\ :sup:`10` But treatment
seeking should not be the only consideration. When services were being
reconfigured to provide for those with personality disorder, a reliance
on specialist services was unsurprising as these appeared to be
underpinned by research evidence. But evidence is now changing. None of
the systematic reviews of psychological treatments for personality
disorder show compelling evidence of superiority of one psychological
therapy over another or, indeed, when the specialist therapy was
compared against good-quality clinical care.

.. _sec2-1:

Community mental health teams: a service for all with personality disorders
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

A good CMHT has: (a) a range of skills that can deal with a wide range
of psychopathology, including managing many with comorbid mental
illnesses; (b) stability, so that the team will provide continuity of
care despite the loss of key individuals; (c) capacity to engage and
contain individuals who are treatment resistant – given their experience
in providing for those with severe mental illness; and (d) a closer link
to general practice than specialist services.

Despite these advantages, nobody can be unaware of the pressures on
CMHTs and so any additional service provision requires more training and
resources if it is to be successful. In this context, services should be
aware that significant funding is coming to community mental health
services in the next 2 years (Tim Kendall of NHS England has pointed out
that this funding includes a ring-fenced sum of £1.3 million for each
50 000 population group for community mental health and crisis-related
services (T. Kendall, personal communication with permission, 2 June
2021)). This is genuinely new money and all should be prepared for this
bonanza and ready and able to spend it wisely. This extra funding should
enable a CMHT to include training in a simple assessment procedure that
will allow it to separate those with significant personality disorder
from those with lesser personality difficulties. Fortunately, the simple
classification by severity in the new ICD-11 classification\ :sup:`11`
is suitable for this task and straightforward scales are available to
help with diagnosis.\ :sup:`12,13` Patients with personality disorder
who are not treatment seeking currently account for a disproportionate
proportion of total costs\ :sup:`14` and to fail to address their extra
needs is negligent.

The procedure adopted by each trust could be along the following lines:
one or more members of the CMHT are trained in the principles of
identification and management of personality disorderson entry to the
team each patient has their personality function assessedthe trained
CMHT members will take over the care-coordinating role for the patients
with the more severe disorderswhen needed, a separate team with
expertise in psychological treatments can be called in for advice and
guidance, adding elements of the specialist interventions such as DBT
but not involving taking over care from the CMHTthe specialist team has
an oversight role for patients with personality disorder in any part of
care; this may often be particularly important when in-patient care is
neededrelevant information and care plans from the CMHT services will be
shared more closely with primary care and crisis resolution teams, and
day services when necessary, so that discontinuity in care can be
reduced as much as possiblegreater use is made of primary care services
and additional resources such as social prescribing, which has great
potential in this group of patients but has been insufficiently embraced
in mental health.\ :sup:`15`

The advantage of this arrangement is that all personality disorders are
recognised, including the Galenic syndromes\ :sup:`16` (closely
intertwined mental state and personality disorders, named after Galen,
who first postulated the link between personality and disease) such as
substance misuse, impulsive disorders and anxiety and avoidant disorders
(the general neurotic syndrome). Continuity of care and informed
feedback are also more likely when patients are transferred to different
parts of the services, and there is also much better transition from
secondary to primary care.

This is the way forward, not the further accumulation of specialist
teams.

We thank Jo Emmanuel, Tim Kendall and Fatema Ibrahimi for advice in the
preparation of this article.

**Conor Duggan** is Emeritus Professor of Forensic Psychiatry in the
Division of Psychiatry and Applied Psychology and the Institute of
Mental Health at the University of Nottingham, UK. **Peter Tyrer** is a
consultant in transformation psychiatry with Lincolnshire Partnership
NHS Foundation Trust, Lincoln, and Emeritus Professor of Community
Psychiatry at Imperial College's Division of Psychiatry, London, UK.

.. _sec-das1:

Data availability
=================

Data availability is not applicable to this article as no new data were
created or analysed in this study.

C.D. wrote the first draft of this article; this was added to by P.T..
Both authors approved the final manuscript.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

.. _nts5:

Declaration of interest
=======================

P.T. is the co-editor of the Against the Stream series and on the
Editorial Board of *BJPsych Bulletin* but had no part in the review or
assessment of this article.
