====================================================================================================
The recording of mental health consultations by patients: clinical, ethical and legal considerations
====================================================================================================



Thomas Hewson
Seri Abraham
Nathan Randles
Adeola Akinola
Richard Cliff
Paul Byrne
Roshelle Ramkisson

:Correspondence: Dr Thomas Hewson
(tomhewson@doctors.org.uk)

:date: 2022-06

:Abstract:
   The topic of patients recording healthcare consultations has been
   previously debated in the literature, but little consideration has
   been given to the risks and benefits of such recordings in the
   context of mental health assessments and treatment. This issue is of
   growing importance given the increasing use of technology in
   healthcare and the recent increase in online healthcare services,
   largely accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic. We discuss the
   clinical, ethical and legal considerations relevant to audio or
   visual recordings of mental health consultations by patients, with
   reference to existing UK guidance and the inclusion of a patient's
   perspective.


.. contents::
   :depth: 3
..

pmc
.. _sec1:

Why do patients record healthcare consultations?
================================================

Recording consultations is increasingly accessible for patients as
smartphones and electronic devices with recording capabilities have
become ubiquitous in modern society. The integration of these devices
into healthcare has been accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic, which
prompted a global upsurge in the use of telemedicine.\ :sup:`1` Many
digital platforms that are used for online consultations, including Zoom
and Microsoft Teams, have in-built recording functions.

Several reasons have been suggested for why patients record healthcare
consultations. These include enhancing their understanding of healthcare
information, replaying clinical encounters, sharing these with others
and for therapeutic purposes.\ :sup:`2` Some patients hold digital
copies of consultations to evidence the care received and to support any
future complains or litigation;\ :sup:`2` this may particularly be the
case if patients have had prior negative healthcare experiences or lost
trust in healthcare providers. For some patients, digital recordings
provide a sense of ownership over their health information.\ :sup:`2`

.. _sec2:

Advice from professional bodies
===============================

The General Medical Council (GMC) recommends that doctors make
arrangements, wherever practical, to support patients in understanding
and retaining health information; such support is described to include
accommodating a patient's wish to record relevant
conversations.\ :sup:`3` They clearly state that doctors must obtain
patients’ consent to conduct visual or audio recordings of
them.\ :sup:`4` However, the GMC currently does not provide formal
guidance on the management of other circumstances in which patients
record healthcare interactions. For example, should clinicians encourage
patients to record them for reasons other than understanding and
retaining information?

The Medical Defence Union (MDU), Medical Protection Society (MPS) and
British Medical Association (BMA) advise that patients do not require
the doctor's permission to record their healthcare
consultations.\ :sup:`5–7` This is because information disclosed during
a consultation is confidential to the patient, not the doctor, and a
recording is therefore not a breach of confidentiality in itself.
Similarly, where recordings are made entirely for personal reasons, they
are unlikely to engage the Data Protection Act. The MPS further advises
that a doctor's duty of care should prevail over any reluctance to
engage in filming by patients.\ :sup:`6`

Although patients can record healthcare consultations, it is less clear
how the recorded material can be utilised. The MPS declares that, since
‘the content of the recording is confidential to the patient, not the
doctor’ this means that ‘the patient can do what they wish with
it’.\ :sup:`6` However, the BMA advises that healthcare staff can
request the removal of recorded materials posted online;\ :sup:`7`
furthermore, refusal of this request could result in litigation owing to
misuse of the professional's private information. Depending on the
nature of the posting, it could potentially violate the Protection from
Harassment Act 1997, the Malicious Communications Act 1988 or the
Communications Act 2003.\ :sup:`7`

Interestingly, none of the above organisations specifically refer to the
mental health or mental capacity of the patient making the recording,
despite the unique considerations this brings.

.. _sec3:

The Mental Health Act
=====================

The Mental Health Act Code of Practice applies to patients detained
under the Mental Health Act 1983. It states that ‘when patients are
admitted, staff should assess the risk and appropriateness of patients
having access to mobile phones and other electronic devices and this
should be detailed in the patient's care plan’.\ :sup:`8` It does not
directly comment on the use of devices for recording healthcare
encounters; nonetheless, it seems reasonable to apply the principles of
the above statement to this situation. The terms ‘risk’ and
‘appropriateness’ suggest that professionals should consider the safety
of healthcare consultations being recorded, and the suitability of the
context, content and intended use(s) of any recording. These factors
will vary according to individual patients and situations, demonstrating
the need for a person-centred approach. If valid clinical reasons exist
for denying access to electronic devices under the Mental Health Act,
professionals should consider whether these extend to the recording of
consultations. In the same way that clinicians note restrictions on
access to personal items, they should document any reasons for
preventing a patient from recording healthcare interactions. This is
important for medico-legal purposes and to alert other professionals of
identified risks.

.. _sec4:

Clinical benefits of patients recording mental health consultations
===================================================================

The recording of healthcare consultations could help patients to
remember vital information, such as self-help strategies, medication
advice and suicide safety plans. This is particularly useful in
psychiatry, given that concentration and attention are impaired in
various mental disorders. If the patient is acutely agitated or
distressed during the consultation, this could further limit their
recall of conversations. Viewing the healthcare encounter when feeling
more relaxed could improve a patient's adherence to medical
recommendations. This could also empower patients and make them feel
more involved in their care by allowing greater time for information
processing.

Recordings make it easier for patients, especially those with poor
recall, to inform family members about their health. This could further
involve families in decision-making processes in the interests of
providing holistic care. The previous recording of healthcare
consultations could additionally aid decision-making processes for
patients who lack mental capacity. For example, they could demonstrate a
person's previously expressed wishes and values, which the team could
refer to when determining the patient's best interests. This could
therefore promote autonomy as an ethical principle for patients with
mental illness.

Recorded consultations also potentially offer more accurate, detailed
and undisputable accounts of healthcare interactions than those that are
formally documented, especially for lengthy clinical encounters where
clinicians must summarise vast amounts of information.\ :sup:`6`
Consultations recorded over time may help patients to chart their
progress and response to care.

.. _sec5:

Risks of patients recording mental health consultations
=======================================================

Despite the above benefits, there are several risks of recording
consultations. First, this could potentially restrict the quality and
quantity of information gathered throughout doctor–patient interactions.
Patients may be less likely to disclose sensitive information,
particularly if they intend to share the recording with others. This
could influence their diagnosis and treatment, while also indirectly
affecting the risks to the patient and to others. For example, a patient
may withhold details of thoughts to harm family members if they are
sharing the recording with these persons, limiting the validity of
clinical risk assessment. Similarly, the doctor may less freely ask
probing questions that expose a patient's vulnerability if they are
aware of the recording being widely distributed. For these reasons,
clinicians should discuss with patients which aspects of healthcare
consultations they wish to record, the purpose(s) of the recording and
whether this could affect their engagement or ability to provide honest
information. Ideally, patients and clinicians should reach a mutually
agreeable decision and work together to mitigate any potential impact on
psychiatric assessment.

Some patients may lack the mental capacity to decide whether they wish
to record healthcare consultations and how to use the recorded
information. In such circumstances, patients could act without
understanding the benefits and risks associated with their intended
use(s) of the recording. This could result in harm to the patient and/or
them making a decision that they later regret when they regain mental
capacity. For example, a patient with mania may report reckless spending
and display disinhibited behaviour during their consultation, but
impulsively decide to record this and post the content online. The
patient may be incapable of understanding and appraising the
consequences of doing this, including heightening their risk of
financial abuse and vulnerability. Furthermore, they may not recognise
that they are demonstrating symptoms of mental illness, and this lack of
insight could result in the unintended sharing of confidential health
information. In this situation, the person would seemingly lack the
mental capacity to record their healthcare encounter; consequently, the
healthcare professional would have a professional and legal duty to act
in their best interests. Healthcare professionals must remember that
mental capacity is assumed until proven otherwise, and unwise decisions
do not equate to the loss of mental capacity.\ :sup:`9`

Clinicians should be mindful of the content of healthcare consultations
and patients’ reactions to this. Discussing sensitive topics such as
suicidal thoughts, self-harm and abuse can evoke strong emotions and
distress. Any intense negative emotions encountered by the patient could
be re-experienced on viewing recorded consultations; in the absence of
appropriate support, this could trigger acute distress and heighten the
individual's risk to themselves in that present moment. Clinicians
should advise patients accordingly of these risks and agree an
appropriate safety plan to address them.

Social media sites are increasingly popular in modern society and some
patients may post their recorded consultations on such platforms. This
could result in both positive and negative comments from the public and
their health information being shared beyond the original intended
audience. Sharing of clips with partial information may also be
misleading without providing a fuller picture of the relevant context.
Clinicians should consider discussing these risks and benefits with
patients, including how public reactions to private health information
could affect their mental state.

.. _sec6:

Risks to other patients and persons
===================================

Healthcare professionals must protect the safety, dignity and privacy of
all patients. A common concern is that healthcare recordings may include
the voice, image or details of other patients in the vicinity of the
recording. This could potentially breach their privacy rights under
Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.\ :sup:`7,10` The
increased use of single bedrooms in mental health units lessens this
risk; however, in-patient mental health wards are often louder than
other environments and professionals should consider whether other
patients are visible or audible in the background. In such
circumstances, it seems best practice that the patient is offered an
alternative environment for the consultation to be recorded in. If this
is not feasible, the recording may need to be prevented to preserve the
confidentiality and privacy of other patients. The proximity of
colleagues to the recording should also be considered to protect their
privacy and to avoid indirectly compromising patient confidentiality,
such as by capturing a colleague's discussions relating to others.

The content of healthcare conversations can include details of third
parties whose confidentiality should be protected.\ :sup:`11` For this
reason, when patients request access to their medical records, content
relating to external persons is usually omitted before granting
access.\ :sup:`11` A similar process should apply to recorded
consultations, with the doctor ensuring that the recorded material does
not breach the confidentiality of others.

.. _sec7:

Further ethical and legal considerations
========================================

Owing to the nature of mental illness, some patients lack the mental
capacity to make decisions regarding their care. For example,
approximately 40–60% of psychiatric in-patients have been estimated to
lack capacity regarding treatment decisions.\ :sup:`12,13` This means
that recorded consultations may not accurately reflect a patient's
desires and opinions, especially if these change throughout the course
of the person's illness or if treatment is being provided against their
wishes (under the principles of the Mental Capacity Act or the Mental
Health Act). These factors should be considered when interpreting prior
recordings made by patients.

.. _sec8:

Covert recording
================

Studies have estimated that 26–40% of healthcare recordings by patients
are made covertly.\ :sup:`14` Reasons for this behaviour include
distrust in the healthcare system, lack of knowledge regarding policies
for ‘open’ recording and fear of recordings being prevented by
clinicians.\ :sup:`14–16` Covert recordings have been used in
disciplinary proceedings by the GMC,\ :sup:`5,17` although the BMA
highlights that most recordings support the actions of
doctors.\ :sup:`7` To reduce covert methods, some authors have suggested
that clinicians should encourage patients to visibly record their
healthcare interactions.\ :sup:`14,15` This could build trust, encourage
shared decision-making and promote an open and honest culture within
organisations. This also provides an opportunity for patients and
clinicians to work together to maximise the benefits and reduce the
risks of any recording, while ensuring that important non-verbal
interactions are captured in any media. The practice of clinicians
encouraging healthcare recordings likely requires organisational support
and a clear organisational framework to support and govern this
activity.

.. _sec9:

Recordings made by carers or relatives
======================================

For some patients, their carers or relatives may attend their healthcare
appointments and record consultations on their behalf. All patients who
have mental capacity can refuse the recording of their health
information by others, but for those without mental capacity, clinicians
must consider whether any recording is in the person's best interests.
This is particularly relevant in child and adolescent mental health
settings, where parents are commonly involved in their children's
healthcare. In the UK, children aged 13 years and above are typically
deemed to have the mental capacity to access personal health records and
accept or refuse parental access to these; however, there is no strict
age threshold, and some children achieve mental capacity earlier than
others.\ :sup:`18,19` Children with the relevant mental capacity should
be permitted to record their consultations and to give or deny their
parents permission to do so. The healthcare professional must also
consider any safeguarding concerns or relationship dynamics that could
influence third party recordings and their clinical assessment. For
example, children could less freely report difficulties at home if their
parents are filming healthcare encounters. For patients with
neurodegenerative conditions or chronic mental illness, early
discussions about their healthcare preferences and other's involvement
in their care could aid decision-making about recording consultations if
and when mental capacity is reduced in the future. A potential benefit
of recording healthcare appointments by parents or carers is that this
can provide an easily accessible record and evidence of access to care
when attending multiagency meetings with education and social care
agencies, especially when neglect is a concern.

.. _sec10:

Patient perspective
===================

The following gives a patient's (N.R.'s) view on the subject. “Having
spent considerable time in psychiatric and therapeutic appointments as a
patient, I was initially shocked when learning of the lack of clear
national guidance regarding patients’ recording of appointments in
mental health settings. This lack of guidance leaves the patient
vulnerable to breaches in confidentiality, potentially in cases where
mental capacity is lost for the patient, and they inadvertently disclose
potentially embarrassing information in public forums. We must consider
the potential humiliation that service users could feel when errors
occur with the use of such recordings. At the same time, recordings
could provide a sense of security to patients and give them greater
confidence in their care.”

“Ideally, there would be an independent method or platform that manages
and stores recordings of healthcare consultations. This way, they could
be used for the benefit of patient care and/or for medico-legal
purposes, while protecting patients from some of the risks.”

.. _sec11:

Summary
=======

Clinical services must adapt to accommodate evolving patient preferences
and work collaboratively with patients to ensure that health information
is appropriately and safely stored and shared with others. The recording
of healthcare consultations offers several benefits to patients;
however, it may also sometimes risk their privacy, safety and dignity or
that of others. We recommend the establishment of clear national
guidelines regarding the recording of mental health consultations. These
guidelines are needed to protect both patients and professionals and are
urgently required, given the increasing use of teleconsultations in
mental healthcare. Such guidelines would need to acknowledge the broad
range of settings and circumstances in which consultations can be
recorded, including in-patient wards, home visits, community settings
and online. Particular consideration needs to be given to specialist
groups such as children and adolescents, patients with intellectual
disabilities and persons with cognitive impairment. Furthermore, the
views of numerous stakeholders must be considered, including patients,
carers, multidisciplinary team members, and legal and ethical experts.

.. _sec12:

About the authors
=================

**Thomas Hewson**, BMBS, BMedSci (Hons), is an Academic Clinical Fellow
in psychiatry with Health Education North West School of Psychiatry, UK.
**Seri Abraham**, MBBS, MRCPsych, MSc, is a consultant psychiatrist with
Pennine Care NHS Foundation Trust, and honorary senior lecturer at
Manchester Metropolitan University, UK. **Nathan Randles** is
Participation Lead with Healthy Young Minds, Pennine Care NHS Foundation
Trust, UK, and a mental health service user. **Adeola Akinola**, MBChB,
MRCPsych, PGDip, LLM, FHEA, is a consultant psychiatrist with Pennine
Care NHS Foundation Trust and a lecturer in ethics and law at the
University of Manchester, UK. **Richard Cliff**, LLB (Hons), is a trust
solicitor with Pennine Care NHS Foundation Trust, UK. **Paul Byrne** is
Head of Information Governance with Pennine Care NHS Foundation Trust,
UK. **Roshelle Ramkisson**, MBBS, FRCPsych, MSc, PGDip, is a consultant
child and adolescent psychiatrist at Pennine Care NHS Foundation Trust,
honorary senior lecturer (teaching) at the University of Manchester, and
senior lecturer and deputy director of the Institute of Psychiatry at
the University of Bolton, UK.

All authors were involved in the planning and creation of content for
this editorial, and all authors reviewed the final manuscript.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

.. _nts3:

Declaration of interests
========================

None.
